Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
LAWS OF KENYA
CIVIL PROCEDURE ACT
CHAPTER 21
Revised Edition 2012 [2010]
Published by the National Council for Law Reporting
with the Authority of the Attorney-General
www.kenyalaw.org
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 3 [Issue 1]
CHAPTER 21
CIVIL PROCEDURE ACT
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART I – PRELIMINARY
Section
1. Short title and application.
1A. Objective of Act.
1B. Duty of Court.
2. Interpretation.
3. Saving of special jurisdiction and powers.
3A. Saving of inherent powers of court.
4. Pecuniary jurisdiction.
PART II – SUITS IN GENERAL
Jurisdiction of Courts
5. Courts to try all civil suits unless barred.
6. Stay of suit.
7. Res judicata.
8. Bar to further suit.
9. When foreign judgment not conclusive.
10. Repealed.
Place of Suing
11. Court in which suit to be instituted.
12. Suit to be instituted where subject-matter situate.
13. Suit for immovable property situate within jurisdiction of different courts.
14. Suit for compensation for wrong to the person or movables.
15. Other suits to be instituted where defendant resides or cause of action arises.
16. Objections to jurisdiction.
17. Power to transfer suits which may be instituted in more than one court.
18. Power of High Court to withdraw and transfer case instituted in subordinate court.
Institution of Suits
19. Institution of suits.
Procedure in Suits and Discovery
20. Service on defendant.
21. Service where defendant resides in another district.
22. Power to order discovery and the like.
23. Summons to witness.
24. Penalty for default.
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 4
Judgment and Decree
Section
25. Judgment and decree.
Interest
26. Interests.
Costs
27. Costs.
PART III – EXECUTION
General
28. Application to orders.
29. Definition of “court which passed a decree”.
Courts by which Decrees may be Executed
30. Court by which decree may be executed.
31. Transfer of decree.
32. Result of execution proceedings to be certified.
33. Powers of court in executing transferred decree.
Questions to be Determined by Court Executing Decree
34. Questions to be determined by court executing decree.
35. Repealed.
Transferees and Legal Representatives
36. Transferee of decree.
37. Legal representative.
Procedure in Execution
38. Powers of court to enforce execution.
39. Enforcement of decree against legal representative.
Arrest and Detention
40. Arrest and detention.
41. Subsistence allowances.
42. Detention and release.
43. Release on ground of illness.
Attachment
44. Property liable to attachment and sale in execution of decree.
45. Seizure of property in dwelling-house.
46. Property attached in execution of decrees of several courts.
47. Private alienation of property after attachment to be void.
Sale
48. Purchaser’s title.
49. Suit against purchaser not maintainable on ground of purchase being on behalf of
plaintiff.
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 5 [Issue 1]
Distribution of Assets
Section
50. Distribution of assets.
Resistance to Execution
51. Resistance to execution.
PART IV – INCIDENTAL PROCEEDINGS
Commissions
52. Power of court to issue commission.
53. Commission to another court.
54. Letter of request.
55. Commission issued by foreign court.
PART V – SUITS IN PARTICULAR CASES
Suits by Aliens and by or against Foreign Rulers
56. When alien may sue.
57. When foreign state may sue.
Interpleader
58. When interpleader suit may be instituted.
PART VI – SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS
Arbitration
59. Arbitration.
59A. Establishment of Mediation Accreditation Committee.
59B. Reference of cases to mediation.
59C. Other alternative dispute resolution methods.
59D. Power to enforce private mediation agreements.
Special Case
60. Power to state case for opinion of court.
Suits Relating to Public Matters
61. Public nuisance.
62. Public charity.
PART VII – SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDINGS
63. Supplemental proceedings.
64. Compensation for arrest, attachment or injunction on insufficient grounds.
PART VIII – APPEALS TO THE HIGH COURT AND COURT OF APPEAL
Appeals from Original Decrees
65. Appeal from other courts.
66. Appeal from decree of High Court.
67. Appeal from original decree.
68. Appeal from final decree where no appeal from preliminary decree.
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 6
Section
69. Decision where appeal heard by two or more judges.
70. Renumbered.
71. Renumbered.
Appeals from Appellate Decrees of a Subordinate Court
71A. Second appeal from subordinate court.
Appeals from Appellate Decrees of the High Court
72. Second appeal from the High Court.
73. Repealed.
74. Repealed.
Appeals from Orders
75. Orders from which appeal lies.
76. Other Orders.
77. What court to hear appeal.
General Provisions Relating to Appeals
78. Powers of appellate court.
79. Procedure in appeals from appellate decrees and orders.
79A. No decree to be altered for error not affecting merits or jurisdiction.
79B. Summary rejection of appeal.
79C. Mode of hearing appeal.
79D. Grounds for second appeal from High Court.
79E. No second appeal from High Court in certain cases.
79F. Appeals by paupers.
79G. Time for filing appeals from subordinate courts.
PART IX – REVIEW
80. Review.
PART X – RULES
81. Rules Committee.
PART XI – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
82. Exemption of certain women.
83. Arrest other than in execution of decree.
84. Exemption from arrest under civil process.
85. Procedure relating to arrest and attachment.
86. Language of courts.
87. Assessors.
88. Administration of oath on affidavit.
89. Miscellaneous proceedings.
90. Orders and notices to be in writing.
91. Application for restitution.
92. Enforcement of liability of surety.
93. Consent or agreement by persons under disability.
94. Execution of decree of High Court before costs ascertained.
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 7 [Issue 1]
Section
95. Enlargement of time.
96. Power to make up deficiency of court fees.
97. Renumbered.
98. Execution of instruments by order of court.
99. Amendment of judgments, decrees or orders.
100. General power to amend.
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 9 [Issue 1]
CHAPTER 21
CIVIL PROCEDURE ACT
[Date of commencement: 31st January, 1924.]
An Act of Parliament to make provision for procedure in civil courts
[Cap. 5 (1948), Act No. 43 of 1948, Act No. 39 of 1956, L.N. 299/1956, L.N. 300/1956, Act No.
46 of 1963, Act No. 19 of 1964, Act No. 17 of 1967, Act No. 8 of 1968, Act No. 21 of 1968,
Act No. 38 of 1968, Act No. 10 of 1969, Act No. 11 of 1970, Act No. 4 of 1974, Act No. 14
of 1977, Act No. 13 of 1978, Act No. 13 of 1980, Act No. 1 of 1981, L.N. 22/1984, Act No.
19 of 1985, Act No. 21 of 1990, Act No. 10 of 1997, Act No. 6 of 2009, Act No. 12 of 2012.]
PART I – PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and application
(1) This Act may be cited as the Civil Procedure Act.
(2) This Act applies to proceedings in the High Court and, subject to the
Magistrate’s Courts Act (Cap. 10), to proceedings in subordinate courts.
[Act No. 17 of 1967, s. 37.]
1A. Objective of Act
(1) The overriding objective of this Act and the rules made hereunder is to
facilitate the just, expeditious, proportionate and affordable resolution of the civil
disputes governed by the Act.
(2) The Court shall, in the exercise of its powers under this Act or the
interpretation of any of its provisions, seek to give effect to the overriding objective
specified in subsection (1).
(3) A party to civil proceedings or an advocate for such a party is under a duty
to assist the Court to further the overriding objective of the Act and, to that effect,
to participate in the processes of the Court and to comply with the directions and
orders of the Court.
[Act No. 6 of 2009, Sch.]
1B. Duty of Court
(1) For the purpose of furthering the overriding objective specified in section 1A,
the Court shall handle all matters presented before it for the purpose of attaining
the following aims—
(a) the just determination of the proceedings;
(b) the efficient disposal of the business of the Court;
(c) the efficient use of the available judicial and administrative resources;
(d) the timely disposal of the proceedings, and all other proceedings in
the Court, at a cost affordable by the respective parties; and
(e) the use of suitable technology.
[Act No. 6 of 2009, Sch.]
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 10
2. Interpretation
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
“Act” includes rules;
“court” means the High Court or a subordinate court, acting in the exercise
of its civil jurisdiction;
“decree” means the formal expression of an adjudication which, so far
as regards the court expressing it, conclusively determines the rights of the
parties with regard to all or any of the matters in controversy in the suit and
may be either preliminary or final; it includes the striking out of a plaint and
the determination of any question within section 34 or section 91, but does not
include—
(a) any adjudication from which an appeal lies as an appeal from an
order; or
(b) any order of dismissal for default:
Provided that, for the purposes of appeal, “decree” includes judgment, and
a judgment shall be appealable notwithstanding the fact that a formal decree
in pursuance of such judgment may not have been drawn up or may not be
capable of being drawn up;
Explanation. — A decree is preliminary when further proceedings have to
be taken before the suit can be completely disposed of. It is final when such
adjudication completely disposes of the suit. It may be partly preliminary and
partly final.
“decree holder” means any person in whose favour a decree has been
passed or an order capable of execution has been made, and includes the
assignee of such decree or order;
“district” means the local limits of the jurisdiction of a subordinate court;
“foreign court” means a court situate outside Kenya which has no authority
in Kenya;
“foreign judgment” means the judgment of a foreign court;
“impartial” in relation to a dispute means being and being seen to be
unbiased towards parties to a dispute, their interests and the options they
present for settlement;
“judge” means the presiding officer of a court;
“judgment-debtor” means any person against whom a decree has been
passed or an order capable of execution has been made;
“legal representative” means a person who in law represents the estate
of a deceased person, and where a party sues or is sued in a representative
character the person on whom the estate devolves on the death of the party
so suing or sued;
“mediation” means an informal and non-adversarial process where an
impartial mediator encourages and facilitates the resolution of a dispute
between two or more parties, but does not include attempts made by a judge
to settle a dispute within the course of judicial proceedings related thereto;
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 11 [Issue 1]
“mediation rules” means the mediation rules made under this Act;
“mediator” means an impartial third party selected to carry out a mediation;
“mesne profits”, in relation to property, means those profits which the
person in wrongful possession of such property actually received or might
with ordinary diligence have received therefrom, together with interest on such
profits, but does not include profits due to improvements made by the person
in wrongful possession;
“movable property” includes growing crops;
“order” means the formal expression of any decision of a court which is not
a decree, and includes a r. nisi;
“pleading” includes a petition or summons, and the statements in writing of
the claim or demand of any plaintiff, and of the defence of any defendant thereto,
and of the reply of the plaintiff to any defence or counterclaim of a defendant;
“prescribed” means prescribed by rules;
“registrar” includes a district registrar and a deputy registrar;
“rules” means rules and forms made by the Rules Committee to regulate
the procedure of courts;
“share in a corporation” includes stock, debenture stock, debentures and
bonds;
“suit” means all civil proceedings commenced in any manner prescribed.
[Act No. 17 of 1967, s. 38, Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch., Act No. 4 of 1974, Sch.,
Act No. 12 of 2012, Sch.]
3. Saving of special jurisdiction and powers
In the absence of any specific provision to the contrary, nothing in this Act shall
limit or otherwise affect any special jurisdiction or power conferred, or any special
form or procedure prescribed, by or under any other law for the time being in force.
3A. Saving of inherent powers of court.
Nothing in this Act shall limit or otherwise affect the inherent power of the court
to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent
abuse of the process of the court.
4. Pecuniary jurisdiction
Save in so far as is otherwise expressly provided, nothing herein contained shall
operate to give any court jurisdiction over suits the amount or value of the subjectmatter of which exceeds the pecuniary limits, if any, of its ordinary jurisdiction.
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 12
PART II – SUITS IN GENERAL
Jurisdiction of Courts
5. Courts to try all civil suits unless barred
Any court shall, subject to the provisions herein contained, have jurisdiction
to try all suits of a civil nature excepting suits of which its cognizance is either
expressly or impliedly barred.
6. Stay of suit
No court shall proceed with the trial of any suit or proceeding in which the matter
in issue is also directly and substantially in issue in a previously instituted suit or
proceeding between the same parties, or between parties under whom they or
any of them claim, litigating under the same title, where such suit or proceeding
is pending in the same or any other court having jurisdiction in Kenya to grant the
relief claimed.
Explanation.—The pendency of a suit in a foreign court shall not preclude a
court from trying a suit in which the same matters or any of them are in issue in
such suit in such foreign court.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
7. Res judicata
No court shall try any suit or issue in which the matter directly and substantially
in issue has been directly and substantially in issue in a former suit between the
same parties, or between parties under whom they or any of them claim, litigating
under the same title, in a court competent to try such subsequent suit or the suit in
which such issue has been subsequently raised, and has been heard and finally
decided by such court.
Explanation. —(1) The expression “former suit” means a suit which has been
decided before the suit in question whether or not it was instituted before it.
Explanation. —(2) For the purposes of this section, the competence of a court
shall be determined irrespective of any provision as to right of appeal from the
decision of that court.
Explanation. —(3) The matter above referred to must in the former suit have
been alleged by one party and either denied or admitted, expressly or impliedly,
by the other.
Explanation. —(4) Any matter which might and ought to have been made
ground of defence or attack in such former suit shall be deemed to have been a
matter directly and substantially in issue in such suit.
Explanation. —(5) Any relief claimed in a suit, which is not expressly granted by
the decree shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to have been refused.
Explanation. —(6) Where persons litigate bona fide in respect of a public right
or of a private right claimed in common for themselves and others, all persons
interested in such right shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to claim
under the persons so litigating.
[L.N. 22/1984.]
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 13 [Issue 1]
8. Bar to further suit
Where a plaintiff is precluded by rules from instituting a further suit in respect of
any particular cause of action, he shall not be entitled to institute a suit in respect
of that cause of action.
9. When foreign judgment not conclusive
A foreign judgment shall be conclusive as to any matter thereby directly
adjudicated upon between the same parties or between parties under whom they
or any of them claim, litigating under the same title, except—
(a) where it has not been pronounced by a court of competent jurisdiction;
(b) where it has not been given on the merits of the case;
(c) where it appears on the face of the proceedings to be founded on an
incorrect view of international law or a refusal to recognize the law of
Kenya in cases in which such law is applicable;
(d) where the proceedings in which the judgment was obtained are
opposed to natural justice;
(e) where it has been obtained by fraud;
(f) where it sustains a claim founded on a breach of any law in force in
Kenya.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
10. Repealed by Act No. 46 of 1963, Second Sch.
Place of Suing
11. Court in which suit to be instituted
Every suit shall be instituted in the court of the lowest grade competent to try
it, except that where there are more subordinate courts than one with jurisdiction
in the same district competent to try it, a suit may, if the party instituting the suit
or his advocate certifies that he believes that a point of law is involved or that any
other good and sufficient reason exists, be instituted in any one of such subordinate
courts:
Provided that—
(i) if a suit is instituted in a court other than a court of the lowest grade
competent to try it, the magistrate holding such court shall return the
plaint for presentation in the court of the lowest grade competent to
try it if in his opinion there is no point of law involved or no other good
and sufficient reason for instituting the suit in his court; and
(ii) nothing in this section shall limit or affect the power of the High Court
to direct the distribution of business where there is more than one
subordinate court in the same district.
[Act No. 19 of 1964, Sch.]
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 14
12. Suit to be instituted where subject matter situate
Subject to the pecuniary or other limitations prescribed by any law, suits—
(a) for the recovery of immovable property, with or without rent or profits;
(b) for the partition of immovable property;
(c) for the foreclosure, sale or redemption in the case of a mortgage of
or charge upon immovable property;
(d) for the determination of any other right to or interest in immovable
property;
(e) for compensation for wrong to immovable property;
(f) for the recovery of movable property actually under distraint or
attachment,
where the property is situate in Kenya, shall be instituted in the court within the
local limits of whose jurisdiction the property is situate:
Provided that a suit to obtain relief respecting, or compensation for wrong to,
immovable property held by or on behalf of the defendant may, where the relief
sought can be entirely obtained through his personal obedience, be instituted either
in the court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the property is situate, or
in the court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant actually and
voluntarily resides or carries on business, or personally works for gain.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
13. Suit for immovable property situate within jurisdiction of different courts
Where a suit is to obtain relief respecting, or compensation for wrong to,
immovable property situate within the jurisdiction of different courts, the suit may
be instituted in any court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction any portion of
the property is situate, provided that, in respect of the value of the subject-matter
of the suit, the entire claim is cognizable by such court.
14. Suit for compensation for wrong to the person or movables
Where a suit is for compensation for wrong done to the person or to movable
property, if the wrong was done within the local limits of the jurisdiction of one court
and the defendant resides or carries on business, or personally works for gain,
within the local limits of the jurisdiction of another court, the suit may be instituted
at the option of the plaintiff in either of those courts.
Illustration.—(a) A residing in Mombasa beats B in Nairobi. B may sue A either
in Mombasa or Nairobi.
Illustration.—(b) A residing in Mombasa publishes at Nairobi statements
defamatory of B. B may sue A either in Mombasa or Nairobi.
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 15 [Issue 1]
15. Other suits to be instituted where defendant resides or cause of action
arises
Subject to the limitations aforesaid, every suit shall be instituted in a court within
the local limits of whose jurisdiction—
(a) the defendant or each of the defendants (where there are more
than one) at the time of the commencement of the suit, actually and
voluntarily resides or carries on business, or personally works for gain;
or
(b) any of the defendants (where there are more than one) at the time
of the commencement of the suit, actually and voluntarily resides or
carries on business, or personally works for gain, provided either the
leave of the court is given, or the defendants who do not reside or
carry on business, or personally work for gain, as aforesaid acquiesce
in such institution; or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.
Explanation.(1)—Where a person has a permanent dwelling at one place and
also a temporary residence at another place, he shall be deemed to reside at both
places in respect of any cause of action arising at the place where he has such
temporary residence.
Explanation.(2)—A corporation shall be deemed to carry on business at its sole
or principal office in Kenya, or, in respect of any cause of action arising at any place
where it has also a subordinate office, at such place.
Explanation.(3)—In suits arising out of contract, the cause of action arises within
the meaning of this section at any of the following places, namely—
(i) the place where the contract was made;
(ii) the place where the contract was to be performed or the performance
thereof completed;
(iii) the place where in performance of the contract any money to which
the suit relates was expressly or impliedly payable.
Illustration.—(a) A is a tradesman in Nairobi. B carries on business in Mombasa.
B by his agent at Nairobi buys goods of A and requests A to deliver them to
Mombasa by rail. A may sue B for the price of the goods either in Nairobi, where
the cause of action has arisen, or in Mombasa, where B carries on business.
Illustration.—(b) A resides at Kisumu, B at Nairobi, and C at Mombasa. A, B,
and C being together at Nakuru, B and C make a joint promissory note payable
on demand and deliver it to A. A may sue B and C at Nakuru, where the cause of
action arose. He may also sue them at Nairobi, where B resides, or at Mombasa,
where C resides; but in each of these cases, if the non-resident defendant objects,
the suit cannot proceed without the leave of the court.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
16. Objections to jurisdiction
No objection as to the place of suing shall be allowed on appeal unless such
objection was taken in the court of first instance and there has been a consequent
failure of justice.
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 16
17. Power to transfer suits which may be instituted in more than one court
Where a suit may be instituted in any one of two or more subordinate courts, and
is instituted in one of those courts, any defendant after notice to the other parties,
or the court of its own motion, may, at the earliest possible opportunity, apply to the
High Court to have the suit transferred to another court; and the High Court after
considering the objections, if any, shall determine in which of the several courts
having jurisdiction the suit shall proceed.
18. Power of High Court to withdraw and transfer case instituted in
subordinate court
(1) On the application of any of the parties and after notice to the parties and
after hearing such of them as desire to be heard, or of its own motion without such
notice, the High Court may at any stage—
(a) transfer any suit, appeal or other proceeding pending before it for
trial or disposal to any court subordinate to it and competent to try or
dispose of the same; or
(b) withdraw any suit or other proceeding pending in any court
subordinate to it, and thereafter—
(i) try or dispose of the same; or
(ii) transfer the same for trial or disposal to any court subordinate
to it and competent to try or dispose of the same; or
(iii) retransfer the same for trial or disposal to the court from which
it was withdrawn.
(2) Where any suit or proceeding has been transferred or withdrawn as
aforesaid, the court which thereafter tries such suit may, subject to any special
directions in the case of an order of transfer, either retry it or proceed from the point
at which it was transferred or withdrawn.
Institution of Suits
19. Institution of suits
Every suit shall be instituted in such manner as may be prescribed by rules.
Procedure in Suits and Discovery
20. Service on defendant
Where a suit has been duly instituted the defendant shall be served in manner
prescribed to enter an appearance and answer the claim.
21. Service where defendant resides in another district
(1) Any document which is required to be served in connexion with a suit may
be sent for service in another district to a court having jurisdiction in that district.
(2) The court to which such document is sent shall, upon receipt thereof,
proceed as if it had been issued by such court and shall then return the document
to the court of issue together with the record, if any, of its proceedings with regard
thereto.
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 17 [Issue 1]
22. Power to order discovery and the like
Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, the court may,
at any time, either of its own motion or on the application of any party—
(a) make such orders as may be necessary or reasonable in all matters
relating to the delivery and answering of interrogatories, the admission
of documents and facts, and the discovery, inspection, production,
impounding and return of documents or other material objects
producible as evidence;
(b) issue summonses to persons whose attendance is required either
to give evidence or to produce documents or such other objects as
aforesaid;
(c) order any fact to be proved by affidavit.
23. Summons to witness
Sections 21 and 22 shall apply to summonses to give evidence or to produce
documents or other material objects.
24. Penalty for default
The court may compel the attendance of any person to whom a summons has
been issued under section 22, and for that purpose may—
(a) issue a warrant for his arrest;
(b) attach and sell his property;
(c) impose a fine on him not exceeding one thousand shillings;
(d) order him to furnish security for his appearance and in default commit
him to prison.
Judgement and decree
25. Judgment and decree
The court, after the case has been heard, shall pronounce judgment, and on
such judgment a decree shall follow:
Provided that it shall not be necessary for the court to hear the case before
pronouncing judgment—
(i) where the plaint is drawn claiming a liquidated demand, and either—
(a) the defendant has not entered such appearance as may be
prescribed; or
(b) the defendant, having entered such appearance, has failed to file a
defence within the time prescribed; or
(ii) in such cases as may be prescribed under section 81(2)(f).
Interest
26. Interests
(1) Where and in so far as a decree is for the payment of money, the court may,
in the decree, order interest at such rate as the court deems reasonable to be paid
on the principal sum adjudged from the date of the suit to the date of the
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 18
decree in addition to any interest adjudged on such principal sum for any period
before the institution of the suit, with further interest at such rate as the court deems
reasonable on the aggregate sum so adjudged from the date of the decree to the
date of payment or to such earlier date as the court thinks fit.
(2) Where such a decree is silent with respect to the payment of further interest
on such aggregate sum as aforesaid from the date of the decree to the date of
payment or other earlier date, the court shall be deemed to have ordered interest
at 6 per cent per annum.
Costs
27. Costs
(1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, and to the
provisions of any law for the time being in force, the costs of and incidental to all
suits shall be in the discretion of the court or judge, and the court or judge shall
have full power to determine by whom and out of what property and to what extent
such costs are to be paid, and to give all necessary directions for the purposes
aforesaid; and the fact that the court or judge has no jurisdiction to try the suit shall
be no bar to the exercise of those powers:
Provided that the costs of any action, cause or other matter or issue shall follow
the event unless the court or judge shall for good reason otherwise order.
(2) The court or judge may give interest on costs at any rate not exceeding
fourteen per cent per annum, and such interest shall be added to the costs and
shall be recoverable as such.
[Act No. 19 of 1985, Sch.]
PART III – EXECUTION
General
28. Application to orders
The provisions of this Act relating to the execution of decrees shall, so far as
they are applicable, be deemed to apply to the execution of orders.
29. Definition of “court which passed a decree”
The expression “court which passed a decree”, or words to that effect, shall, in
relation to the execution of decrees, except where the context otherwise requires,
include—
(a) where the decree to be executed has been passed in the exercise of
appellate jurisdiction, the court of first instance; and
(b) where the court of first instance has ceased to exist or to have
jurisdiction to execute it, the court which, if the suit wherein the decree
was passed were instituted at the time of making the application for
the execution of the decree, would have jurisdiction to try such suit.
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 19 [Issue 1]
Courts by which Decrees may be Executed
30. Court by which decree may be executed
A decree may be executed either by the court which passed it or by the court
to which it is sent for execution.
31. Transfer of decree
(1) The court which passed a decree may, on the application of the decreeholder, send it for execution to another court—
(a) if the person against whom the decree is passed actually and
voluntarily resides or carries on business, or personally works for gain,
within the local limits of the jurisdiction of that other court; or
(b) if such person has no property within the local limits of the jurisdiction
of the court which passed the decree sufficient to satisfy such decree
and has property within the local limits of the jurisdiction of such other
court; or
(c) if the decree directs the sale or delivery of immovable property situate
outside the local limits of the jurisdiction of the court which has passed
it; or
(d) if the court which has passed the decree considers for any other
reason, which it has recorded in writing, that the decree should be
executed by such other court.
(2) The court which passed a decree may of its own motion send it for execution
to any court of inferior but competent jurisdiction.
32. Result of execution proceedings to be certified
The court to which a decree is sent for execution shall certify to the court which
passed it the fact of such execution, or where the former court fails to execute the
same the circumstances attending such failure.
33. Powers of court in executing transferred decree
(1) The court executing a decree sent to it shall have the same powers in
executing such decree as if it had been passed by itself.
(2) All persons disobeying or obstructing the execution of the decree shall be
punishable by such court in the same manner as if it had passed the decree; and
its order in executing such decree shall be subject to the same rules in respect of
appeal as if the decree had been passed by itself.
Questions to be Determined by Court Executing Decree
34. Questions to be determined by court executing decree
(1) All questions arising between the parties to the suit in which the decree
was passed, or their representatives, and relating to the execution, discharge or
satisfaction of the decree, shall be determined by the court executing the decree
and not by a separate suit.
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 20
(2) The court may, subject to any objection as to limitation or jurisdiction, treat
a proceeding under this section as a suit, or a suit as a proceeding, and may, if
necessary, order payment of any additional court fees.
(3) Where a question arises as to whether any person is or is not the
representative of a party, such question shall, for the purposes of this section, be
determined by the court.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, a plaintiff whose suit has been
dismissed, and a defendant against whom a suit has been dismissed, are parties
to the suit.
35. Repealed by Act No. 21 of 1968, Sch.
Transferees and Legal Representatives
36. Transferee of decree
Every transferee of a decree shall hold the same subject to the equities, if any,
which the judgment-debtor might have enforced against the original decree-holder.
37. Legal representative
(1) Where a judgment-debtor dies before the decree has been fully satisfied,
the holder of the decree may apply to the court which passed it to execute the same
against the legal representative of such deceased, or against any person who has
intermeddled with the estate of such deceased.
(2) Where the decree is executed against such legal representative, or against
any person as aforesaid, he shall be liable only to the extent of the property of the
deceased which has come to his hands and has not been duly disposed of; and,
for the purpose of ascertaining such liability the court executing the decree may,
of its own motion or on the application of the decree-holder, compel such legal
representative to produce such accounts as it thinks fit.
Procedure in Execution
38. Powers of court to enforce execution
Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, the court may,
on the application of the decree-holder, order execution of the decree—
(a) by delivery of any property specifically decreed;
(b) by attachment and sale, or by sale without attachment, of any
property;
(c) by attachment of debts;
(d) by arrest and detention in prison of any person;
(e) by appointing a receiver; or
(f) in such other manner as the nature of the relief granted may require:
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 21 [Issue 1]
Provided that where the decree is for the payment of money, execution by
detention in prison shall not be ordered unless, after giving the judgment-debtor an
opportunity of showing cause why he should not be committed to prison, the court,
for reasons to be recorded in writing, is satisfied—
(a) that the judgment-debtor, with the object or effect of obstructing or
delaying the execution of the decree—
(i) is likely to abscond or leave the local limits of the jurisdiction
of the court; or
(ii) has after the institution of the suit in which the decree was
passed, dishonestly transferred, concealed or removed any
part of his property, or committed any other act of bad faith in
relation to his property; or
(b) that the judgment-debtor has, or has had since the date of the decree,
the means to pay the amount of the decree, or some substantial part
thereof, and refuses or neglects, or has refused or neglected, to pay
the same, but in calculating such means there shall be left out of
account any property which, by or under any law, or custom having
the force of law, for the time being in force, is exempt from attachment
in execution of the decree; or
(c) that the decree is for a sum for which the judgment-debtor was bound
in a fiduciary capacity to account.
[Act No. 11 of 1970, Sch.]
39. Enforcement of decree against legal representative
(1) Where a decree is passed against a party as the legal representative of a
deceased person, and the decree is for the payment of money out of the property of
the deceased, it may be executed by the attachment and sale of any such property.
(2) Where no such property remains in the possession of the judgment-debtor,
and he fails to satisfy the court that he has duly applied such property of the
deceased as is proved to have come into his possession, the decree may be
executed against the judgment-debtor to the extent of the property in respect of
which he has failed so to satisfy the court in the same manner as if the decree had
been against him personally.
Arrest and Detention
40. Arrest and detention
(1) A judgment-debtor may be arrested in execution of a decree at any hour
and on any day, and shall as soon as practicable be brought before the court, and
his detention may be in any prison of the district in which the court ordering the
detention is situate, or, if such prison does not afford suitable accommodation, in
any other place which the Minister may appoint for the detention of persons ordered
by the courts of such district to be detained:
Provided that—
(i) for the purpose of making an arrest under this section, no dwellinghouse shall be entered after sunset and before sunrise;
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 22
(ii) no outer door of a dwelling-house shall be broken open unless such
dwelling-house is in the occupancy of the judgment-debtor and he
refuses or in any way prevents access thereto; but when the officer
authorized to make the arrest has duly gained access to any dwellinghouse he may break open the door of any room in which he has reason
to believe the judgment-debtor is to be found;
(iii) if the room is in the actual occupancy of a woman who is not the
judgment-debtor, and who according to the custom of her community
does not appear in public, the officer authorized to make the arrest
shall give notice to her that she is at liberty to withdraw and,
after allowing a reasonable time for her to withdraw and giving
her reasonable facility for withdrawing, may enter the room for the
purpose of making the arrest;
(iv) where the decree in execution of which a judgment-debtor is arrested
is a decree for the payment of money and the judgment-debtor pays
the amount of the decree and the costs of the arrest to the officer
arresting him, such officer shall at once release him.
(2) The Minister may, by notice in the Gazette, declare that any person or
class of persons whose arrest might be attended with danger or inconvenience to
the public shall not be liable to arrest in execution of a decree otherwise than in
accordance with such procedure as he may direct.
[Act No. 43 of 1948, L.N. 299/1956, L.N. 300/1956, Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
41. Subsistence allowances
The Minister may, by notice in the Gazette, fix scales of monthly allowances
payable for the subsistence of a judgment-debtor.
[L.N. 300/1956, Act No. 8 of 1968, Sch., Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
42. Detention and release
(1) Every person detained in prison in execution of a decree shall be so detained
—
(a) where the decree is for the payment of a sum of money exceeding
one hundred shillings, for a period not exceeding six months; and
(b) in any other case, for a period not exceeding six weeks:
Provided that he shall be released from such detention before the expiration of the
said period of six months or six weeks, as the case may be—
(i) on the amount mentioned in the warrant for his detention being paid
to the officer in charge of the prison; or
(ii) on the decree against him being otherwise fully satisfied, if the court
so orders; or
(iii) on the request of the person on whose application he has been so
detained, if the court so orders; or
(iv) on the omission of the person, on whose application he has been so
detained, to pay subsistence allowance.
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 23 [Issue 1]
(2) A judgment-debtor released from detention under this section shall not
merely by reason of his release be discharged from his debt, but he shall not be
liable to be rearrested under the decree in execution of which he was detained in
prison.
43. Release on ground of illness
(1) At any time after a warrant for the arrest of a judgment-debtor has been
issued, the court may cancel it on the ground of his serious illness.
(2) Where a judgment-debtor has been arrested, the court may release him if
in its opinion he is not in a fit state of health to be detained in prison.
(3) Where a judgment-debtor has been committed to prison, he may be
released therefrom—
(a) by the superintendent of the prison in which he is confined on the
grounds of the existence of any infectious or contagious disease; or
(b) by the committing court or the High Court on the ground of his suffering
from any serious illness.
(4) A judgment-debtor released under this section may be rearrested, but the
period of his detention in prison shall not in the aggregate exceed that prescribed
by section 42 of this Act.
Attachment
44. Property liable to attachment and sale in execution of a decree
(1) All property belonging to a judgment debtor, including property over which
or over the profits of which he has a disposing power which he may exercise for
his own benefit, whether that property is held in his name or in the name of another
but on his behalf, shall be liable to attachment and sale in execution of a decree:
Provided that the following shall not be liable to attachment or sale—
(i) the necessary wearing apparel, cooking vessels, beds and bedding of
the judgment-debtor and of his wife and children, and those personal
ornaments from which, in accordance with religious usage, a woman
cannot be parted;
(ii) the tools and implements of a person necessary for the performance
by him of his trade or profession;
(iii) where the judgment-debtor is an agriculturalist—
(a) the first ten thousand shillings in value of his livestock, if any; and
(b) the first five thousand shillings in value of all implements, tools,
utensils, plant and machinery used in connection with stock or dairy
farming or in the production of crops or plants; and
(c) the first one thousand shillings in value of agricultural produce
necessary to enable him to earn his livelihood;
(iv) books of accounts;
(v) a right to sue in damages;
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 24
(vi) a right of personal service;
(vii) stipends and gratuities allowed to pensioners of the Government, or
payable out of a service family pension fund notified in the Gazette by
the Minister, and political pensions;
(viii) two thirds of the salary of public officer or other person in employment;
(ix) a contingent or possible right or interest, including an expectancy of
succession by survivorship;
(x) a right of future maintenance;
(xi) any fund or allowance declared by law to be exempt from attachment
and sale in execution of a decree.
(2) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of the Armed Forces Act
(Cap. 199) or of any similar law for the time being in force.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch., Act No. 1 of 1981, s. 25.]
45. Seizure of property in dwelling-house
(1) No person in executing any process under this Act directing or authorizing
seizure of movable property shall enter any dwelling-house after sunset and before
sunrise.
(2) No outer door of a dwelling-house shall be broken open unless such
dwelling-house is in the occupancy of the judgment-debtor and he refuses or in any
way prevents access thereto; but when the person executing the process has duly
gained access to any dwelling-house he may break open the door of any room in
which he has reason to believe any such property to be.
(3) Where a room in a dwelling-house is in the actual occupancy of a woman
who, according to the custom of the country, does not appear in public, the person
executing the process shall give notice to the woman that she is at liberty to
withdraw; and after allowing reasonable time for her to withdraw and giving her
reasonable facility for withdrawing, he may enter the room for the purpose of
seizing the property, using at the same time every precaution consistent with these
provisions to prevent its clandestine removal.
46. Property attached in execution of decrees of several courts
(1) Where property not in the custody of a court is under attachment in execution
of decrees of more courts than one, the court which shall receive and realize that
property and shall determine any claim thereto and any objection to the attachment
thereof shall be the court of the highest grade, or, where there is no difference in
grade between the courts, the court under whose decree the property was first
attached.
(2) Nothing in this section shall invalidate any proceeding taken by a court
executing one of the decrees.
47. Private alienation of property after attachment to be void
Where an attachment has been made, any private transfer or delivery of the
property attached or of any interest therein, and any payment to the judgmentdebtor of any debt, dividend or other moneys contrary to such attachment, shall be
void as against all claims enforceable under the attachment.
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 25 [Issue 1]
Sale
48. Purchaser’s title
Where immovable property is sold in execution of a decree and the sale has
become absolute, the property shall be deemed to have vested in the purchaser
from the time when the property is sold and not from the time when the sale
becomes absolute.
49. Suit against purchaser not maintainable on ground of purchase being
on behalf of plaintiff
(1) No suit shall be maintained against any person claiming title under a
purchase certified by the court in such manner as may be prescribed on the ground
that the purchase was made on behalf of the plaintiff or on behalf of someone
through whom the plaintiff claims.
(2) Nothing in this section shall bar a suit to obtain a declaration that the name
of any purchaser certified as aforesaid was inserted in the certificate fraudulently or
without the consent of the real purchaser, or interfere with the right of a third person
to proceed against that property, though ostensibly sold to the certified purchaser,
on the ground that it is liable to satisfy a claim of such third person against the
real owner.
Distribution of Assets
50. Distribution of assets
(1) Where assets are held by any court and more persons than one have
before the receipt of such assets by such court lodged applications in court for the
execution of decrees for the payment of money issued against the same judgmentdebtor and have not obtained satisfaction thereof, the assets, after deducting
the costs of realization, shall be distributed amongst such decree-holders in
accordance with the priorities of the lodging of their several applications:
Provided that, where any property is sold subject to a mortgage or charge, the
mortgagee or encumbrancer shall not be entitled to share in any surplus arising
from the sale.
(2) Every application for execution of a decree shall, at the time of lodgment,
be endorsed by the court, or by a duly authorized officer of the court, with a note
of the day upon which and the hour at which such lodgment has been effected.
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect any right of the Government.
Resistance to Execution
51. Resistance to execution
Where the court is satisfied that the holder of a decree for the possession of
immovable property, or that the purchaser of immovable property sold in execution
of a decree, has been resisted or obstructed in obtaining possession of the
property by the judgment-debtor or some other person on his behalf, and that such
resistance or obstruction was without any just cause, the court may, at the instance
of the decree-holder or purchaser, order the judgment-debtor or such other person
to be detained in prison for a term which may extend to thirty days, and may further
direct that the decree-holder or purchaser be put in possession of the property.
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 26
PART IV – INCIDENTAL PROCEEDINGS
Commissions
52. Power of court to issue commission
Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, the court may
issue a commission—
(a) to examine any person;
(b) to make a local investigation;
(c) to examine or adjust accounts; or
(d) to make a partition.
53. Commission to another court
(1) A commission for the examination of any person may be issued by the High
Court to any subordinate court or to any advocate, and by a subordinate court of
the first or second class to any other subordinate court situate in a district other
than the district in which the court of issue is situate and having jurisdiction in the
place in which the person to be examined resides.
(2) Every court receiving a commission for the examination of any person under
subsection (1) shall examine him or cause him to be examined pursuant thereto,
and the commission, when it has been duly executed, shall be returned, together
with the evidence taken under it, to the court from which it was issued, unless
the order for issuing the commission has otherwise directed, in which case the
commission shall be returned in terms of the order.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
54. Letter of request
In lieu of issuing a commission, the High Court or a subordinate court with the
sanction of the High Court may issue a letter of request to examine a witness
residing at any place outside Kenya.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
55. Commission issued by foreign court
Commissions issued by foreign courts for the examination of persons in Kenya
shall be executed and returned in such manner as may be from time to time
authorized by the High Court.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
PART V – SUITS IN PARTICULAR CASES
Suits by Aliens and by or against Foreign Rulers
56. When alien may sue
(1) Alien enemies residing in Kenya with the permission of the President, and
alien friends, may sue in the courts of Kenya.
(2) No alien enemy residing in Kenya without such permission, or residing in a
foreign country, shall sue in any of such courts.
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 27 [Issue 1]
Explanation.—Every person residing in a foreign country the government of
which is at war with Kenya, and carrying on business in that country without a
licence in that behalf under the hand of the President, shall, for the purpose of
subsection (2), be deemed to be an alien enemy residing in foreign country.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
57. When foreign state may sue
(1) A foreign state may sue in any court of Kenya, provided that state has been
recognized by Kenya, and provided the object of the suit is to enforce a private right
vested in the head of that state or in any officer of that state in his public capacity.
(2) Every court shall take judicial notice of the fact that a foreign state has or
has not been recognized by Kenya.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
Interpleader
58. When interpleader suit may be instituted
Where two or more persons claim adversely to one another the same debt,
sum of money or other property, movable or immovable, from another person,
who claims no interest therein other than for charges or costs and who is ready
to pay or deliver it to the rightful claimant, such other person may institute a suit
of interpleader against all the claimants, or where a suit dealing with the same
subject-matter is pending may intervene by motion on notice in such suit, for the
purpose of obtaining a decision as to the person to whom the payment or delivery
shall be made, and of obtaining indemnity for himself:
Provided that where any suit is pending in which the rights of all parties can be
properly decided no such suit of interpleader shall be instituted.
PART VI – SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS
Arbitration
59. Arbitration
All references to arbitration by an order in a suit, and all proceedings thereunder,
shall be governed in such manner as may be prescribed by rules.
59A. Establishment of Mediation Accreditation Committee
(1) There shall be a Mediation Accreditation Committee which shall be
appointed by the Chief Justice.
(2) The Mediation Accreditation Committee shall consist of—
(a) the chairman of the Rules Committee;
(b) one member nominated by the Attorney-General;
(c) two members nominated by the Law Society of Kenya; and
(d) eight other members nominated by the following bodies respectively
—
(i) the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators (Kenya Branch);
(ii) the Kenya Private Sector Alliance;
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 28
(iii) the International Commission of Jurists (Kenya Chapter);
(iv) the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Kenya;
(v) the Institute of Certified Public Secretaries;
(vi) the Kenya Bankers’ Association;
(vii) the Federation of Kenya Employers, and
(viii) the Central Organisation of Trade Unions.
(3) The Chief Justice shall designate a suitable person to be the Mediation
Registrar, who shall be responsible for the administration of the affairs of the
Committee under this Act.
(4) The functions of the Mediation Accreditation Committee shall be to—
(a) determine the criteria for the certification of mediators;
(b) propose rules for the certification of mediators;
(c) maintain a register of qualified mediators;
(d) enforce such code of ethics for mediators as may be prescribed; and
(e) set up appropriate training programmes for mediators.
[Act No. 12 of 2012, Sch.]
59B. Reference of cases to mediation
(1) The Court may—
(a) on the request of the parties concerned; or
(b) where it deems it appropriate to do so; or
(c) where the law so requires,
direct that any dispute presented before it be referred to mediation.
(2) Where a dispute is referred to mediation under subsection (1), the parties
thereto shall select for that purpose a mediator whose name appears in the
mediation register maintained by the Mediation Accreditation Committee.
(3) A mediation under this Part shall be conducted in accordance with the
mediation rules.
(4) An agreement between the parties to a dispute as a result of a process of
mediation under this Part shall be recorded in writing and registered with the Court
giving the direction under subsection (1), and shall be enforceable as if it were a
judgment of that Court.
(5) No appeal shall lie against an agreement referred to in subsection (4).
[Act No. 12 of 2012, Sch.]
59C. Other alternative dispute resolution methods
(1) A suit may be referred to any other method of dispute resolution where the
parties agree or the Court considers the case suitable for such referral.
(2) Any other method of alternative dispute resolution shall be governed by
such procedure as the parties themselves agree to or as the Court may, in its
discretion, order.
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 29 [Issue 1]
(3) Any settlement arising from a suit referred to any other alternative dispute
resolution method by the Court or agreement of the parties shall be enforceable
as a judgment of the Court.
(4) No appeal shall lie in respect of any judgment entered under this section.
[Act No. 12 of 2012, Sch.]
59D. Power to enforce private mediation agreements
All agreements entered into with the assistance of qualified mediators shall be
in writing and may be registered and enforced by the Court.
[Act No. 12 of 2012, Sch.]
Special Case
60. Power to state case for opinion of court
Where any persons agree in writing to state a case for the opinion of the court,
then the court shall try and determine the same in the manner prescribed.
Suits Relating to Public Matters
61. Public nuisance
(1) In the case of a public nuisance, the Attorney-General, or two or more
persons having the consent in writing of the Attorney- General, may institute a suit
though no special damage has been caused, for a declaration and injunction or for
such other relief as may be appropriate to the circumstances of the case.
(2) Nothing in this section shall limit or otherwise affect any right of suit which
may exist independently of its provisions.
62. Public charity
In the case of an alleged breach of any express or constructive trust created
for public purposes of a charitable or religious nature, or where the direction of the
court is deemed necessary for the administration of the trust, the Attorney-General,
or two or more persons having an interest in the trust and having obtained the
consent in writing of the Attorney-General, may institute a suit, whether contentious
or not in the High Court to obtain a decree—
(a) removing any trustee;
(b) appointing a new trustee;
(c) vesting any property in trustees;
(d) directing accounts and inquiries;
(e) declaring what proportion of the trust property or of the interest therein
shall be allocated to any particular object of the trust;
(f) authorizing the whole or any part of the trust property to be let, sold,
mortgaged or exchanged;
(g) settling a scheme; or
(h) granting such further or other relief as the nature of the case may
require.
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 30
PART VII – SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDINGS
63. Supplemental proceedings
In order to prevent the ends of justice from being defeated, the court may, if it
is so prescribed—
(a) issue a warrant to arrest the defendant and bring him before the court
to show cause why he should not give security for his appearance, and
if he fails to comply with any order for security commit him to prison;
(b) direct the defendant to furnish security to produce any property
belonging to him and to place the same at the disposal of the court or
order the attachment of any property;
(c) grant a temporary injunction and in case of disobedience commit the
person guilty thereof to prison and order that his property be attached
and sold;
(d) appoint a receiver of any property and enforce the performance of his
duties by attaching and selling his property;
(e) make such other interlocutory orders as may appear to the court to
be just and convenient.
64. Compensation for arrest, attachment or injunction on insufficient
grounds
(1) Where, in any suit in which an arrest or attachment has been effected or a
temporary injunction granted under section 63—
(a) it appears to the court that the arrest, attachment or injunction was
applied for on insufficient grounds; or
(b) the suit of the plaintiff fails and it appears to the court that there was
no reasonable or probable ground for instituting the same,
the defendant may apply to the court, and the court may, upon such application,
award against the plaintiff by its order such amount, not exceeding two thousand
shillings, as it deems a reasonable compensation to the defendant for the expense
or injury caused to him:
Provided that, a court shall not award under this section an amount exceeding
the limits of its pecuniary jurisdiction.
(2) An order determining an application under subsection (1) shall bar any suit
for compensation in respect of the arrest, attachment or injunction.
PART VIII – APPEALS TO THE HIGH COURT AND COURT OF APPEAL
[Act No. 38 of 1968.]
Appeals from Original Decrees
65. Appeal from other courts
(1) Except where otherwise expressly provided by this Act, and subject to such
provision as to the furnishing of security as may be prescribed, an appeal shall lie
to the High Court—
(a) Deleted by Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.;
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 31 [Issue 1]
(b) from any original decree or part of a decree of a subordinate court,
other than a magistrate’s court of the third class, on a question of law
or fact;
(c) from a decree or part of a decree of a Kadhi’s Court, and on such an
appeal the Chief Kadhi or two other Kadhis shall sit as assessor or
assessors.
(2) Deleted by Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.
(3) Deleted by Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.
[Act No. 17 of 1967, s. 39, Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch., Act No. 4 of 1974, Sch.]
65A. Renumbered as section 79B.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
66. Appeal from decree of High Court
Except where otherwise expressly provided in this Act, and subject to such
provision as to the furnishing of security as may be prescribed, an appeal shall lie
from the decrees or any part of decrees and from the orders of the High Court to
the Court of Appeal.
[Act No. 14 of 1977, Sch.]
67. Appeal from original decree
(1) An appeal may lie from an original decree passed ex parte.
(2) No appeal shall lie from a decree passed by the court with the consent of
parties.
68. Appeal from final decree where no appeal from preliminary decree
Where any party aggrieved by a preliminary decree does not appeal from that
decree, he shall be precluded from disputing its correctness in any appeal which
may be preferred from the final decree.
69. Decision where appeal heard by two or more judges
Where an appeal is heard by a court consisting of two or more judges the appeal
shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of the judges or a majority of them:
Provided that where a court consisting of two judges is divided in its opinion
the appeal shall be reheard by a court consisting of an uneven number of judges
being not less than three.
[Act No. 13 of 1980, Sch.]
70. Renumbered as section 79A.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
71. Renumbered as section 79C.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 32
Appeals from Appellate Decrees of a Subordinate Court
71A. Second appeal from subordinate court
(1) Except where otherwise expressly provided by this Act, and subject to such
provision as to the furnishing of security as may be prescribed, an appeal shall lie
to the High Court from a decree passed by a subordinate court of the first class on
an appeal from a subordinate court of the third class, on a question of law only.
(2) An appeal under this section shall be final.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch., Act No. 13 of 1978, Sch.]
Appeals from Appellate Decrees of the High Court
72. Second appeal from the High Court
(1) Except where otherwise expressly provided in this Act or by any other law for
the time being in force, an appeal shall lie to the Court of Appeal from every decree
passed in appeal by the High Court, on any of the following grounds, namely—
(a) the decision being contrary to law or to some usage having the force
of law;
(b) the decision having failed to determine some material issue of law or
usage having the force of law;
(c) a substantial error or defect in the procedure provided by this Act or
by any other law for the time being in force, which may possibly have
produced error or defect in the decision of the case upon the merits.
(2) An appeal may lie under this section from an appellate decree passed ex
parte.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
73. Deleted by Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.
74. Deleted by Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.
Appeals from Orders
75. Orders from which appeal lies
(1) An appeal shall lie as of right from the following orders, and shall also lie
from any other order with the leave of the court making such order or of the court
to which an appeal would lie if leave were granted—
(a) an order superseding an arbitration where the award has not been
completed within the period allowed by the court;
(b) an order on an award stated in the form of a special case;
(c) an order modifying or correcting an award;
(d) an order staying or refusing to stay a suit where there is an agreement
to refer to arbitration;
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 33 [Issue 1]
(e) an order filing or refusing to file an award in an arbitration without the
intervention of the court;
(f) an order under section 64;
(g) an order under any of the provisions of this Act imposing a fine or
directing the arrest or detention in prison of any person except where
the arrest or detention is in execution of a decree;
(h) any order made under rules from which an appeal is expressly allowed
by rules.
(2) No appeal shall lie from any order passed in appeal under this section.
76. Other Orders
(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided, no appeal shall lie from any order
made by a court in the exercise of its original or appellate jurisdiction; but, where a
decree is appealed from, any error, defect or irregularity in any order affecting the
decision of the case may be set forth as a ground of objection in the memorandum
of appeal.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (1), where any party
aggrieved by an order of remand from which an appeal lies does not appeal
therefrom, he shall thereafter be precluded from disputing its correctness.
77. What court to hear appeal
Where an appeal from any order is allowed, it shall lie to the court to which an
appeal would lie from the decree in the suit in which the order was made.
General Provisions Relating to Appeals
78. Powers of appellate court
(1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, an
appellate court shall have power—
(a) to determine a case finally;
(b) to remand a case;
(c) to frame issues and refer them for trial;
(d) to take additional evidence or to require the evidence to be taken;
(e) to order a new trial.
(2) Subject as aforesaid, the appellate court shall have the same powers and
shall perform as nearly as may be the same duties as are conferred and imposed
by this Act on courts of original jurisdiction in respect of suits instituted therein.
79. Procedure in appeals from appellate decrees and orders
The provisions of this Part relating to appeals from original decrees shall, as far
as may be, apply to appeals—
(a) from appellate decrees; and
(b) from orders made under this Act or under any special or local law in
which a different procedure is not provided.
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 34
79A. No decree to be altered for error not affecting merits or jurisdiction
No decree shall be reversed or substantially varied, nor shall any case be
remanded, in appeal on account of any misjoinder of parties or causes of action
or any error, defect or irregularity in any proceedings in the suit, not affecting the
merits of the case or the jurisdiction of the court.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
79B. Summary rejection of appeal
Before an appeal from a subordinate court to the High Court is heard, a judge of
the High Court shall peruse it, and if he considers that there is no sufficient ground
for interfering with the decree, part of a decree or order appealed against he may,
notwithstanding section 79C, reject the appeal summarily.
[Act No. 17 of 1967, s. 40, Act No. 38 of 1968, Sch., Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
79C. Mode of hearing appeal
Appeals from subordinate courts shall be heard by one judge of the High Court
except when in any particular case the Chief Justice shall direct that the appeal be
heard by two or more judges of the High Court; and such direction may be given
before the hearing of the appeal or at any time before judgment is delivered.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
79D. Grounds for second appeal from High Court
No second appeal from a decree passed in appeal by the High Court shall lie
except on the grounds mentioned in section 72.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
79E. No second appeal from High Court in certain cases
No second appeal from a decree passed in appeal by the High Court shall lie
in any suit when the amount or value of the subject-matter of the original suit does
not exceed ten thousand shillings unless special leave has been first obtained from
the court before whom the appeal is to be heard.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch., Act No. 21 of 1990, Sch.]
79F. Appeals by paupers
A person who has been allowed to take, defend or be a party to any legal
proceedings in a subordinate court as a pauper may not appeal to the High Court,
or from the High Court to the Court of Appeal, except with the leave of the Court
before whom the proceedings appealed against were heard or (if such leave is
refused) unless special leave has been first obtained from the Court before whom
the appeal is to be heard.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, Sch.]
79G. Time for filing appeals from subordinate courts
Every appeal from a subordinate court to the High Court shall be filed within
a period of thirty days from the date of the decree or order appealed against,
excluding from such period any time which the lower court may certify as having
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 35 [Issue 1]
been requisite for the preparation and delivery to the appellant of a copy of the
decree or order:
Provided that an appeal may be admitted out of time if the appellant satisfies
the court that he had good and sufficient cause for not filing the appeal in time.
[Act No. 10 of 1969, s.]
PART IX – REVIEW
80. Review
Any person who considers himself aggrieved—
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed by this Act, but
from which no appeal has been preferred; or
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed by this Act,
may apply for a review of judgment to the court which passed the decree or made
the order, and the court may make such order thereon as it thinks fit.
PART X – RULES
81. Rules Committee
(1) There shall be a Rules Committee consisting of two judges of the High Court,
two judges of the Court of Appeal, the Attorney- General and two advocates, one
to be nominated by the Law Society of Kenya and the other by the Mombasa Law
Society, which shall have power to make rules not inconsistent with this Act and,
subject thereto, to provide for any matters relating to the procedure of civil courts.
(1A) The judges referred to in subsection (1) shall be appointed by the Chief
Justice, who shall nominate one of them to be chairman of the Committee; and the
Chief Justice may himself elect to be a member of the committee in which case
he shall be the chairman.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred
by subsection (1), such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters
namely—
(a) the service of summonses, notices and other processes by post or in
any other manner either generally or in any specified areas, and the
proof of such service;
(b) the maintenance and custody, while under attachment, of livestock
and other movable property, the fees payable for such maintenance
and custody, the sale of such livestock and property, and the proceeds
of such sale;
(c) procedure in suits by way of counterclaim and the valuation of such
suits for the purposes of jurisdiction;
(d) procedure in garnishee and charging orders either in addition to, or in
substitution for, the attachment and sale of debts;
(e) procedure where the defendant claims to be entitled to contribution or
indemnity over against any person, whether a party to the suit or not;
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 36
(f) summary procedure—
(i) in suits in which the plaintiff seeks only to recover a debt or
liquidated demand in money payable by the defendant, with or
without interest, arising on a contract express or implied; or on
an enactment where the sum sought to be recovered is a fixed
sum of money or in the nature of a debt other than a penalty;
or on a guarantee, where the claim against the principal is in
respect of a debt or a liquidated demand only or on a trust; or
(ii) in suits for the recovery of immovable property, with or without
a claim for rent or mesne profits, by a landlord against a tenant
whose term has expired or has been duly determined for nonpayment of rent, or against persons claiming under such tenant;
(ff) the selection of mediators and the hearing of matters referred to
mediation under this Act.
(g) procedure by way of originating summons;
(h) consolidation of suits, appeals and other proceedings;
(i) delegation to any registrar or other official of the court of any judicial,
quasi-judicial and non-judicial duties; and
(j) all forms, registers, books, entries and accounts which may be
necessary or desirable for the transaction of the business of civil
courts.
(3) The Chief Justice may, in consultation with the Rules Committee, issue
practice notes or directions to resolve procedural difficulties arising under this Act,
in order to facilitate the attainment of the overriding objective of this Act as specified
in section 1A.
[Act No. 39 of 1956, s. 5, Act No. 14 of 1977, Sch., Act No.
13 of 1978, Sch., Act No. 10 of 1997, Act No. 6 of 2009, Sch.]
PART XI – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
82. Exemption of certain women
(1) Women who according to the customs and manners of their community
ought not to be compelled to appear in public shall be exempt from personal
appearance in court.
(2) Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to exempt those women from
arrest in execution of civil process.
83. Arrest other than in execution of decree
The provisions of section 40, 41 and 43 shall apply so far as may be to all
persons arrested under this Act.
84. Exemption from arrest under civil process
(1) No judge, magistrate or other judicial officer shall be liable to arrest under
civil process while going to, presiding in or returning from his court.
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 37 [Issue 1]
(2) Where any matter is pending before a tribunal having jurisdiction therein,
or believing in good faith that it has such jurisdiction, the parties thereto, their
advocates and recognized agents, and their witnesses acting in obedience to a
summons shall be exempt from arrest under civil process other than process issued
by such tribunal for contempt of court while going to or attending such tribunal for
the purpose of such matter, and while returning from such tribunal.
(3) Nothing in subsection (2) shall enable a judgment-debtor to claim exemption
from arrest under an order for immediate execution, or where such judgment-debtor
attends to show cause why he would not be committed to prison in execution of
a decree.
85. Procedure relating to arrest and attachment
(1) Where an application is made to a subordinate court that any person shall
be arrested or that any property shall be attached under any provision of this Act,
and where the person resides or is found, or the property is situate, outside the
local limits of the jurisdiction of the court to which the application is made, the court
may in its discretion issue a warrant of arrest, or make an order of attachment,
and send to the magistrate of the subordinate court within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction that person resides or is found or the property is situate the warrant or
order together with the probable amount of the costs of the arrest or attachment.
(2) On the issue of a warrant or order under subsection (1) the magistrate of
the subordinate court within whose jurisdiction the person to be arrested resides
or is found or the property to be attached is situate, as the case may be, shall have
power—
(a) to endorse and execute the warrant or order; or
(b) to issue, before the endorsement, a provisional warrant or order for
the arrest of the defendant or the attachment of the property upon
receipt of such telegraphic or other information as may satisfy him that
a warrant or order has been issued:
Provided that a person arrested or property attached under the provisional warrant
or order shall be discharged or released from attachment unless the original
warrant or order is produced and endorsed within such time as may seem
reasonable.
(3) The court ordering an arrest under subsection (2) shall upon receipt of the
original warrant send the person arrested to the court by which the original warrant
was issued, unless that person shows cause to the satisfaction of the former court
why he should not be so sent or unless he furnishes sufficient security for his
appearance before the latter court or for satisfying any decree that may be or may
have been passed against him by that court, in either of which cases the court
making the arrest shall release him and shall inform the court by which the original
warrant was issued accordingly.
(4) Where an application is made to a judge of the High Court that any person
shall be arrested or that any property shall be attached under any provision of this
Act, and where owing to distance or for other sufficient cause the
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 38
warrant or order cannot be immediately executed, it shall be competent for another
judge of the High Court to issue a provisional warrant or order for the arrest of the
defendant or the attachment of the property upon receipt of such telegraphic or
other information as may satisfy him that a warrant or order has been issued:
Provided that a person arrested or property attached under the provisional
warrant or order shall be discharged or released from attachment unless the
original warrant or order is produced within such time as may seem reasonable.
(5) The judge issuing a provisional warrant under subsection (4) shall send the
person arrested to such places as may be specified in the original warrant, unless
such person shows cause why he should not be so sent, or unless he furnishes
sufficient security for his appearance at such place as aforesaid or for satisfying
any decree that may be or may have been passed against him, in either of which
cases the judge ordering the arrest shall release him and shall inform the judge by
whom the original warrant was issued accordingly.
86. Language of courts
(1) The language of the High Court and of the Court of Appeal shall be English,
and the language of subordinate courts shall be English or Swahili.
(2) Deleted by Act No. 17 of 1967, s. 41.
(3) Written applications to the High Court and to the Court of Appeal shall be
in English and to subordinate courts in English or Swahili.
[Act No. 17 of 1967, s. 41, Act No. 14 of 1977, Sch.]
87. Assessors
(1) Any court may in any cause or matter pending before it in which questions
may arise as to the laws or customs of any tribe, caste or community, summon to
its assistance one or more competent assessors, and such assessors shall attend
and assist accordingly.
(2) In any Admiralty or Vice-Admiralty cause of salvage, towage or collision, the
court, whether it be exercising its original or its appellate jurisdiction, may summon
to its assistance, in such manner as it may direct or as may be prescribed, two
competent assessors; and such assessors shall attend and assist accordingly.
(3) Every such assessor shall be summoned in such manner as the court may
direct, and shall receive such fees for his attendance as may be prescribed to be
paid in such manner as the court may direct.
88. Administration of oath on affidavit
In the case of any affidavit under this Act—
(a) any court, magistrate, registrar of a court, notary public or
commissioner of oaths; or
(b) any officer or other person whom the High Court may appoint in this
behalf,
may administer the oath to the deponent.
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 39 [Issue 1]
89. Miscellaneous proceedings
The procedure provided in this Act in regard to suits shall be followed as far as
it may be applicable in all proceedings in any court of civil jurisdiction.
90. Orders and notices to be in writing
All orders or notices served on or given to any person under this Act shall be
in writing.
91. Application for restitution
(1) Where and in so far as a decree is varied or reversed, the court of first
instance shall, on the application of the party entitled to any benefit by way of
restitution or otherwise, cause such restitution to be made as will, so far as may
be, place the parties in the position they would have occupied but for such decree
or such part thereof as has been varied or reversed; and for this purpose the
court may make any orders, including orders for the refund of costs and for
the payment of interest, damages, compensation and mesne profits, which are
properly consequential on such variation or reversal.
(2) No suit shall be instituted for the purpose of obtaining any restitution or other
relief which could be obtained by application under subsection (1).
92. Enforcement of liability of surety
Where any person has become liable as surety—
(a) for the performance of any decree or any part thereof; or
(b) for the restitution of any property taken in execution of a decree; or
(c) for the payment of any money, or for the fulfillment of any condition
imposed on any person, under an order of the court in any suit or in
any proceeding consequent thereon,
the decree or order may be executed against him, to the extent to which he has
rendered himself personally liable, in the manner herein provided for the execution
of decrees, and such person shall for the purposes of appeal be deemed a party
within the meaning of section 34:
Provided that such notice in writing as the court in each case thinks sufficient
has been given to the surety.
93. Consent or agreement by persons under disability
In all suits to which any person under disability is a party, any consent or
agreement as to any proceeding shall, if given or made with the express leave of
the court by the next friend or guardian for the suit, have the same force and effect
as if such person were under no disability and had given such consent or made
such agreement.
94. Execution of decree of High Court before costs ascertained
Where the High Court considers it necessary that a decree passed in the
exercise of its original civil jurisdiction should be executed before the amount of the
costs incurred in the suit can be ascertained by taxation, the court may order that
the decree shall be executed forthwith, except as to so much thereof as relates to
the costs; and as to so much thereof as relates to the costs that the decree may
be executed as soon as the amount of the costs shall be ascertained by taxation.
CAP. 21
Civil Procedure
[Rev. 2012]
[Issue 1] C17 - 40
95. Enlargement of time
Where any period is fixed or granted by the court for the doing of any act
prescribed or allowed by this Act, the court may, in its discretion, from time to time,
enlarge such period, even though the period originally fixed or granted may have
expired.
96. Power to make up deficiency of court fees
Where the whole or any part of any fee prescribed for any document by the law
for the time being in force relating to court fees has not been paid, the court may,
in its discretion, at any stage, allow the person by whom such fee is payable to
pay the whole or part, as the case may be, of the fee; and upon such payment the
document in respect of which such fee is payable shall have the same force and
effect as if such fee had been paid in the first instance.
97. Renumbered as section 3A.
98. Execution of instruments by order of court
Where any person neglects or refuses to comply with a decree or order directing
him to execute any conveyance, contract or other document, or to endorse any
negotiable instrument, the court may, on such terms and conditions, if any, as it
may determine, order that the conveyance, contract or other document shall be
executed or that the negotiable instrument shall be endorsed by such person as
the court may nominate for that purpose, and a conveyance, contract, document or
instrument so executed or endorsed shall operate and be for all purposes available
as if it had been executed or endorsed by the person originally directed to execute
or endorse it.
99. Amendment of judgments, decrees or orders
Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in judgments, decrees or orders, or errors
arising therein from any accidental slip or omission, may at any time be corrected
by the court either of its own motion or on the application of any of the parties.
100. General power to amend
The court may at any time, and on such terms as to costs or otherwise as it may
think fit, amend any defect or error in any proceeding in a suit; and all necessary
amendments shall be made for the purpose of determining the real question or
issue raised by or depending on the proceeding.
[Rev. 2012]
Civil Procedure
CAP. 21
C17 - 40 [Issue 1]