THE LAW OF TORTS (basic overview)
The word tort has been derived from the Latin tortus which means crooked or twisted. In French, tort
means a wrong. In law, tort denotes certain civil wrongs. It means, a tort is a wrong. Sir F. Pollock has
defined tort as “An act which causes harm to a determinate person, whether intentionally or not, not
being a breach of a duty arising out of a personal relation or contract, and which is either contrary to law,
or an omission of a specific legal duty, or a violation of an absolute right”.
Every tort results from the breach of a certain duty which is primarily fixed by law, unlike other civil
wrongs, such as breach of contract, where the duty in question is fixed by the parties themselves. Thus,
the duty not to defame, injure or damage the property of any person is one fixed by the law and its
breach may constitute a tort, whereas the duty to supply goods under a contract of sale is duty created
by the parties themselves in their contract. In tort, the duty is imposed on persons generally, i.e. on ever
individual, but in other cases the duty is imposed only on the parties concerned, e.g. the duties created
by a contract are imposed only on the parties to the contract and on no one else. Similarly, the duty in
tort is owed to every other person, unlike in contract cases where one contracting party owes his
contractual obligation to the other contracting party and to no one else.
A tort, as such, differs from other civil wrongs in a number of respects. It is common law wrong which is
usually remedied by an award of “Unliquidated Damages”. Unliquidated damages are those whose
quantum or assessment is left for the determination to a court at its discretion. These are distinct from
liquidated damages which are fixed by the plaintiff. Certain other remedies are also available which will
be considered when the various torts are separately dealt with.
A person who commits a tort is called a tortfeasor. Where two or more persons commit a tort, they are
known as joint tortfeasors. They may be sued jointly, or any one of them may be sued for the whole of
the damage. In case of the joint tortfeasors, there is a right of contribution, under which the court may
apportion the damages between them in such a way as is just, having regard to their respective degrees
of blame (Law Reform Act (Cap. 26, section 3).
FUNCTION OF THE LAW OF TORTS
The primary function of the law of torts is to compensate persons injured by the civil wrongs of others, by
compelling the tortfeasor to pay for the damage occasioned by his tort. Besides this, there are certain
other functions and these include the following:
1. To determine rights between parties to a dispute. A party to a dispute may bring an action for a
declaration of his rights; and once the court makes a declaration, the rights of the parties are
determined.
2. To prevent a Continuance or Repetition of Harm. Where the injury complained of is of a
continuous nature or likely to be repeated by the tortfeasor, the injured party may be granted an
injunction to prevent its continuance or repetition, e.g. in cases of trespass to land.
3. To Protect Certain Rights Recognized by Law. There are certain rights which every individual is
entitled to and which are recognized by law. These rights are protected by the law of torts e.g. a person’s
1
reputation or right to good name is protected by the tort for negligence which imposes a duty of care on
every other person.
4. To Restore Property to its Rightful Owner. Where property is wrongfully taken away from its
rightful owner or otherwise dealt with contrary to his rights, he may seek a restitution of the property or
its value since the wrongful act amounts to the tort of trespass to goods (or land).
MALICE
Malice means ill-will or desire to cause damage to someone. In legal sense, malice means a wrongful act
which is done purposely without having a lawful excuse. In tort, the intention or motive for an action is
generally irrelevant. The general rule is that a bad intention does not make a lawful action as unlawful
and similarly an innocent or good intention is not a defence to a tort.
Bradford Corporation v. Pickles (1895).
P, with a view to inducing Bradford Corporation to buy his land at a high price, sank a shaft on his land
which interfered with the water flowing in undefined channels into the corporation reservoir. The
corporation applied for an injunction to restrain P from collecting the underground water. Held: that an
injunction would not lie. P was entitled as owner to draw from his land the underground water. His
‘malice’, if any, in trying to force the purchase of land, was irrelevant. No use of property which would be
legal if done with a proper motive can be illegal if done with an improper motive.
Wilkinson v. Downton (1897).
A, as a practical joke, told Mrs. B that her husband had met with an accident. Mrs. B suffered a nervous
shock and was ill as a result. Mrs. B brought an action against A for false and malicious representation.
The fact that A passed the information as a joke was irrelevant, and Mrs. B was entitled to damages.
Malice in itself is not a tort, but it can be an important element in certain torts. Main examples of such
torts are: Malicious prosecution, malicious falsehood, defamation, conspiracy and in certain cases,
nuisance.
NATURE OF TORTIOUS LIABILITY
We have already stated that a tort is a civil wrong which is usually remedied by an award of unliquidated
damages. Prof. P.H. Winfield asserts that “tortuous liability arises from the breach of a duty primarily
fixed by law; such duty is towards persons generally, and its breach is redressible by an action for
unliquidated damages”.
Every person is under a duty to compensate for his wrongful acts which have resulted in injury to another
person. It is this duty to compensate that determines his liability in tort. Generally, the plaintiff must
prove that he has suffered harm and that there has in consequence been a violation of his legal right.
Some civil wrongs are actionable even if no damage is suffered e.g. trespass to land. Whether the plaintiff
has any remedy in some cases of tort depends on the following two principles of general application:-
1. Damnum sine injuria:
2
Literally translated, this phrase means “Harm without legal injury.” It refers to a circumstance where a
person has suffered actual harm without any violation of his legal right. A person aggrieved in this way
has no legal remedy:
Mogul Steamship Co. v. McGregor, Gow& Co. (1982).
Certain ship-owners reduced their freight charges for the sole purpose of driving their rival out of
business. The plaintiff, who had thus been driven out of business, brought an action against the ship-
owners. Held: A trader ruined by the legitimate competition of his rivals could have no redress in tort.
2. Injuria sine damno
This refers to a situation where a person suffers a violation of his right without any actual loss or damage
sustained by Him. This is especially so in the case of torts which are actionable “per’ se’ (i.e. without
proof of any damage) e.g. trespass to land, libel etc.
The Court can award the damages to the plaintiff in such cases.
Ashby v. White, (1703)
In this case the defendant, a returning officer, wrongfully refused to register a properly tendered vote of
the plaintiff who was a legally qualified voter. In spite of this, the candidate for whom the vote was
tendered was elected, and no loss was suffered by the rejection of the vote. It was held that the
defendant was liable because he deprived the plaintiff of his legal right of registering his vote.
The tortious liability can be also determined on the basis of the following principle:
The Fault principle
Most torts are based on the fault principle. Under this principle, it is necessary to establish some fault on
the part of the wrongdoer because he can be made liable in tort. A person is said to be at fault where he
fails to live up to some ideal standard of conduct set by law. Three elements are relevant in the
determination of fault, and any one of them may be relied upon:-
(i) Intention:
Where a person does a wrongful act desiring that its consequences should follow, he is said to have
intended it; and to that extent there is some amount of fault on his part.
(ii) Recklessness:
An act is said to be done recklessness where it is done without caring whatever its consequences might
be. Recklessness, as such, constitutes fault on the part of the wrongdoer.
(iii) Negligence
3
A person is also a fault where he does a wrongful act negligently i.e. where the circumstances are such
that he ought to have foreseen the consequences of his act and avoided it altogether. (Here, we are
concerned with negligence as an element of fault).
Distinction between Tort, Crime and Breach of Contract
We may distinguish between a tort, a crime and a breach of contract as under:
(i) Tort and Crime
A crime is a breach of public rights whereas a tort is a civil wrong. The main object of criminal proceeding
is the punishment to the criminal persons but the object of proceedings in tort is not punishment. Its
main aim is the compensation to the plaintiff for the loss or injury caused by the defendant i.e. damages.
Some cases may be actionable under criminal law and law of torts e.g. if ‘A’ assaults ‘B’, there is both a
crime and a tort.
(ii) Tort and Breach of Contract:
In contract, the duties are fixed by the parties to a contract. But in tort, the duties are fixed by law
(common law or statute). In some cases, a breach of contract and tort may take place simultaneously. We
assume ‘X’ employs a private surgeon to operate his wife. If ‘Y’ fails to perform his duty properly then ‘X’
has a cause of action against ‘Y’ for (i) breach of the contractual duty of care, and (ii) the tort of
negligence.
4