LEGAL NOTICE NO. ……………………………………
THE SMALL CLAIMS COURT ACT (No. 2 of 2016)
THE SMALL CLAIMS COURTS RULES, 2017
ARRANGEMENT OF RULES
1—Short title and commencement
2—Interpretation
3—Filing a claim
4—Serving the statement of claim
5—Responding to a claim
6—Making a counterclaim
7—Third parties
8—Where a respondent does not respond to a claim
9—Documents that shall be served
10—Settlement conference
11—Amending or withdrawing a statement of claim or response or other document
12—Witnesses
13—Hearing
14—Offer to settle
15—Satisfaction piece
16—Payment of the judgment
17—Payment hearing
18—Warrant of arrest for not attending Court
19—Where a warrant of imprisonment is issued
20—Applications to the Court
21—Review or cancellation of an order
22—Electronic filing
23—Service of documents
24—Proof of service
25—Contempt of court
26—Costs, fees and expenses
27—Forms
LEGAL NOTICE NO.
THE SMALL CLAIMS COURT ACT (No. 2 of 2016)
THE SMALL CLAIMS COURTS RULES, 2017
IN EXERCISE of powers conferred by section 50 of the Small Claims Court Act, the Chief
Justice makes the following Rules—
Short title and
commencement
1. These Rules may be cited as the Small Claims Courts Rules, 2017 and
shall come into force on such date as the Chief Justice may, by notice in
the Gazette, appoint.
Interpretation 2. In these Rules unless the context otherwise requires—
“Act” means the Small Claims Courts Act;
“Adjudicator” means an Adjudicator appointed under section 5 of the
Act;
"claimant’" means a person who is making the claim;
“creditor” means a person who, by order of the Court, a debtor is required
to pay;
“Court” means the Small Claims Court established under section 5 of the
Act;
“debtor” means a person who, by order of the Court, is required to pay a
creditor;
“electronic document” means a document that has been transmitted for
filing in Court electronically;
“intermediary” means a person approved by the Court who acts in a
matter on behalf of a minor;
“Registrar” means the Registrar of the Small Claims Court appointed
pursuant to section 8 of the Act; and
“respondent” means a person against whom a claim is made.
Filing a claim 3. (1) To file a claim a person shall complete a statement of claim following
the instructions on the prescribed form.
1
(2) A claimant shall file a statement of claim and pay the required fee at
the Court nearest to where—
(a) the transaction or event that resulted in the claim took place; or
(b) the respondent lives or carries on business.
(3) A claimant may name more than one respondent in a statement of
claim where the claim against each respondent is related to or connected
with the original subject matter of the claim.
(4) A claimant who has a claim amounting to more than one hundred
thousand shillings may abandon that part of the claim that is in excess of
one hundred thousand shillings.
(5) To abandon part of a claim, the claimant shall state on the statement
of claim that the amount over one hundred thousand shillings is
abandoned.
(6) A claimant who abandons part of a claim may not at any time sue for
the abandoned part of the claim, unless the whole of the claim is
withdrawn under rule 6(8) and then the claim is pursued in the
Magistrates Court.
(7) A claimant whose claim is based on damage to the claimant’s vehicle,
resulting from a motor vehicle accident, shall attach to the statement of
claim either—
(a) an itemized estimate of damage from a qualified mechanic; or
(b) a receipt for repairs completed by a qualified mechanic.
(8) An Adjudicator may refuse—
(a) to accept an itemized estimate of damage; or
(b) full recovery of a claim based on a receipt submitted under rule
3(7).
(9) A claimant making a claim against a deceased person shall make the
claim against the estate of the deceased.
Serving the
statement of claim
4. (1) The claimant shall serve, in the manner set out in rule 23, each
respondent named in the statement of claim with the respondent's copy of
the statement of claim.
2
(2) Where a statement of claim has not been served within twelve months
after it was issued by the Court, it expires but the claimant may apply to
have it renewed under rule 20(3).
(3) A statement of claim may be served on an individual outside local
limits of the jurisdiction of the Court where—
(a) the individual normally resides in the local limits of the jurisdiction
of the Court;
(b) the transaction or event that resulted in the claim took place in the
local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court; or
(c) the Court gives permission.
(4) Before a statement of claim is served outside local limits of the
jurisdiction of the Court, the claimant shall indicate the time limit for
filing a response from outside local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court
on the statement of claim as set out in rule 5(5) and file a copy, within that
time limit on the statement of claim, at the Court.
(5) Where a statement of claim cannot be served, the claimant may apply
to the Court to—
(a) permit another method of service to be used; and
(b) set the time limit for filing a response.
(6) Where another method of service is permitted, a copy of the Court
order shall be served with the statement of claim unless the Court—
(a) orders otherwise; or
(b) orders notice to be given by advertisement in a newspaper with
national circulation.
(7) A statement of claim that is served as permitted by a Court order is
validly served.
(8) Where the Court permits a notice to be given by advertisement, the
party who obtained the order shall pay for the advertisement.
Responding to a
claim
5. (1) A respondent who receives a statement of claim may take one or more
of the following actions—
3
(a) pay the amount claimed directly to the claimant and ask the
claimant to withdraw the claim under rule 11;
(b) admit all or part of the claim;
(c) admit all or part of the claim and propose a payment schedule
following the requirements of rule 15;
(d) oppose all or part of the claim by listing reasons why the claim is
opposed;
(e) make a counterclaim against the claimant under rule 6;
(f) apply to transfer the proceeding as set out in rule 5(6); and
(g) make a claim against a third party under rule 7.
(2) A respondent who intends on taking an action under rule 5(1)(b) to (g)
shall complete a response in the prescribed form.
(3) A respondent shall file a response at the Court where the statement of
claim was filed.
(4) A respondent shall serve a copy of the response on all parties named
in the statement of claim in the manner set out in rule 23.
(5) A response to a statement of claim shall be filed by a respondent
within—
(a) ten days of service, where the respondent was served in local
limits of the jurisdiction of the Court; or
(b) within thirty days of service where the respondent was served
outside local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court.
(6) Where a respondent resides a considerable distance from the Court
where the statement of claim was filed, and the respondent has outlined in
the response a defence that is more than a bare denial, the respondent may
apply to the Court under rule 20(2)(f) to have the case transferred to a
Court near where the respondent resides.
(7) Further to sub rule (6), the respondent shall satisfy the Court that there
is a reason for the transfer and the Court shall give notice of the
application to transfer to the claimant, and the claimant may, within
fourteen days of receiving the notice, respond.
4
(8) Where a respondent admits all or part of the claim in a response and
proposes a payment schedule, the respondent shall serve a copy of the
response with the section entitled “Agreement with Claim” complete.
(9) Before the settlement conference, a claimant may accept an admission
in full settlement of a claim by applying to the Court in the prescribed
form for a judgment in the same terms as the respondent’s admission.
(10) Where a claimant accepts the admission of a respondent, but the
respondent has not proposed how the amount owed shall be paid, the
claimant may apply to the Court for a judgment, and follow the steps set
out in rule 15 to enforce the judgment including requesting a payment
hearing to determine how the money will be paid.
(11) A default judgment shall not issue against the State without leave of
the Court.
Making a
counterclaim
6. (1) A counterclaim is a claim made by a respondent against a claimant
that can be conveniently tried at the same time as the claimant’s claim,
and includes a set-off.
(2) A respondent may make a counterclaim against a claimant in the
response following the instructions on prescribed form.
(3) A respondent shall serve a counterclaim which is contained in the
response on all parties named in the statement of claim in the manner set
out in rule 23.
(4) A claimant who receives a response which makes a counterclaim may
take one or more of the following actions—
(a) pay the amount of the counterclaim directly to the respondent and
ask the respondent to withdraw the counterclaim;
(b) admit all or part of the counterclaim;
(c) admit all or part of the counterclaim and propose a payment
schedule under rule 15; and
(d) oppose all or part of the claim by listing reasons why the claim is
opposed.
(5) A respondent who has a counterclaim amounting to more than one
hundred thousand shillings may—
5
(a) abandon part of the counterclaim so it may be heard in the Court;
or
(b) commence an action in a Magistrates Court.
(6) To abandon part of a counterclaim, the respondent shall state on the
counterclaim part of the response that the amount over one hundred
thousand shillings is abandoned.
(7) A respondent who abandons part of a counterclaim may not at any time
sue for that part.
(8) A respondent who commences an action in a Magistrates Court against
a claimant may apply to the magistrate for orders suspending the claim.
(9) Where the small claims trial is held and a judgment is entered or other
order is made against the respondent, the Adjudicator may order the
claimant not to take any action to enforce the judgment or order—
(a) until a date set by the Adjudicator; or
(b) until a decision is given by the Magistrate Court on the respondents
action, whichever comes first.
(10) Where a respondent commences an action in the Magistrate Court
against a claimant who has abandoned part of a claim under rule 3(5), the
claimant may withdraw the claim from the Court, and—
(a) commence an action in the Magistrate Court and claim the higher
amount; or
(b) participate in the action began by the respondent in the Magistrate
Court and claim the higher amount.
Third parties 7. (1) Where a respondent who has filed a response believes that another
person is liable to pay all or part of the claim, the respondent may make a
claim against the other person by—
(a) completing a third party notice following the instructions in the
prescribed form, where the settlement conference has not been
held; or
(b) applying to an Adjudicator under rule 20(3) for an order permitting
a claim to be made against the other person where the settlement
conference has been held.
6
(2) A respondent shall file a third party notice at the Court where the
statement of claim was filed.
(3) The respondent shall serve, in the manner set out in rule 23, a person
named as the third party with the following—
(a) a copy of the third party notice;
(b) a copy of the statement of claim;
(c) a copy of the response to the statement of claim; and
(d) a copy of the notice of settlement conference or trial, where one
has been issued.
(4) A respondent shall serve the documents referred to in rule 7(3) on a
third party in the same way as required for service of a statement of claim
under rule 23.
(5) Within twenty-one days after filing a third party notice, the
respondent shall file a certificate of service in the prescribed form at the
Court to prove that the documents have been served as required, unless
the third party has filed a response.
(6) Where a respondent does not file a certificate of service as required
under rule 7(5), the third party notice shall expire, unless renewed for a
further twenty-one days by the Court upon the application of the
respondent, under rule 20(3).
(7) A respondent shall serve a copy of the third party notice on each of
the other parties within twenty-one days after it is filed in the manner set
out in rule 23.
(8) To respond to a third party notice, the person named as a third party
shall follow the rules for responding to a claim under rule 5.
(9) An Adjudicator may make an order involving any of the parties.
(10) Where a third party files a response after a settlement conference
another settlement conference shall be held, unless an Adjudicator orders
otherwise.
Where a respondent
does not respond to
a claim
8. (1) Where a respondent does not file a response within the time limit
under rule 5(5), the claimant may ask the Court for a default judgment.
7
(2) A default judgment shall not be made on a counterclaim or third party
notice, except under rule 20(2)(j).
(3) To apply for a default judgment under rule 8(1), a claimant shall
complete the prescribed form following the instructions on the form, and
file it at the Court, together with a copy of the certificate of service for the
statement of claim.
(4) Where a claimant completes the steps in rule 8(3), the Court may—
(a) enter a default judgment where it is satisfied that there is sufficient
proof; or
(b) set a hearing date for the claimant to prove the claim.
(5) A default judgment shall require a respondent to pay the amount
claimed plus amounts expended for filing and service of documents as
allowed under rule 26.
(6) Where another respondent has filed a response and a date is set for a
settlement conference or trial of the claim, the hearing shall be held at that
time, unless an Adjudicator orders otherwise.
(7) A respondent who has not filed a response is not entitled to receive
notice of a hearing under this rule.
(8) After a date is set for a hearing under this rule, a respondent may not
file a response without the permission of an Adjudicator under rule 20(3).
(9) After hearing the claimant, the Adjudicator may—
(a) where the claim is for money, make a default judgment that
requires the respondent to pay the amount determined by the
Adjudicator plus expenses under rule 25; or
(b) in any other case, make the appropriate order.
(10) Where a claimant does not attend Court at the time set for a hearing
under this rule, the Adjudicator may cancel the hearing, but the claimant
may ask the Court to reschedule it.
(11) The creditor may collect payment under the default judgment in
accordance with rule 15.
8
(12) Despite rule 20(5), where an application has been made to set aside a
default judgment the Adjudicator may, where appropriate, dispense with a
hearing.
Documents that
shall be served
9. (1) Where a claim has been scheduled for a trial, hearing of an application
or settlement conference, the parties to that claim shall file with the Court
a list of documents that the party is going to rely on at the trial, hearing of
an application or settlement conference.
(2) A list of documents and a copy of each document shall be served, in
the manner set out in rule 21, on the other party at least three days before
a trial, application or settlement conference unless rule 13 provides
otherwise.
(3) Where a party claims that a document is privileged or not admissible
in Court, the party so claiming shall state this on their list of documents.
(4) Where a party does not file their list of documents with the Court or
serve copies on the other parties named in the statement of claim in the
manner set out in rule 23, the Court may order that party to do so.
(5) Where a party has filed and served their list of documents and realized
the list was not correct or was incomplete, that party shall file a
supplementary list of documents and provide the other party with copies
of the documents not included in the first list.
(6) Where a party does not file and serve their list and copies of the
documents in the manner set out in rule 21, the Court may make an order
it considers just, including an order that the proceeding be dismissed, or
an order that the defence be struck and judgment entered.
Settlement
conference
10. (1) Before a trial date is set, a settlement conference may be held at the
time and place set by the Court, unless the Court orders otherwise.
(2) The Court shall serve a notice of settlement conference on the parties
at least fourteen days before the date set for the settlement conference.
(3) All parties to a claim shall attend the settlement conference.
(4) A party who is not a natural person shall be represented at a settlement
conference by a person who has authority to settle the claim.
(5) A party to a claim shall bring to the settlement conference all
documents and reports that the party shall rely on at trial.
9
(6) Where, despite the best efforts of a party, a document or report cannot
be brought to a settlement conference, that party may apply to the Court
for an order postponing the conference under rule 20(3) as long as the
application is filed at least seven days before the date set for the
conference.
(7) Where a settlement conference cannot be conducted properly because a
party is not prepared for it, the Adjudicator may order that party to pay the
reasonable expenses of the other party or parties.
(8) A party may change a settlement conference date—
(a) with the prior consent of all parties, by contacting the Court to
determine a suitable date;
(b) by filing a consent to change the date under rule 20(1); or
(c) by applying for an order changing the date of the settlement
conference under rule 20(3) at least seven days before the date set
for the settlement conference, unless the Court orders otherwise
and giving notice to the other party as the Court requires.
(9) Where the date of the settlement conference is changed, the Court shall
notify the parties of the place and time of the rescheduled conference.
(10) At a settlement conference where the person hearing the matter is an
Adjudicator, the Adjudicator may do one or more of the following—
(a) facilitate settlement of the matter;
(b) decide on issues that do not require evidence;
(c) enter a judgment or make another appropriate order, in terms
agreed to by the parties, in accordance with rule 15;
(d) set a trial date where a trial is necessary;
(e) discuss evidence that shall be required and the procedure that shall
be followed where a trial is necessary;
(f) order a party to produce any information at the settlement
conference or anything as evidence at the trial;
(g) where damage to property is involved in the dispute, order a party
to permit a person chosen by another party to examine the property
damage;
10
(h) adjourn the settlement conference and make an order for
examination of property or records or disclosure of evidence
between the parties to occur before the next settlement conference;
(i) adjourn the settlement conference to pursue further settlement
discussions; and
(j) make an order for the just, speedy and inexpensive resolution of
the claim.
(11) An Adjudicator who presides over a settlement conference shall not
hear the matter where it proceeds to trial, unless the parties agree to have
that Adjudicator preside at the trial.
(12) Where the person hearing the matter is not an Adjudicator, that
person who has been designated by the Registrar may do one or more of
the following—
(a) facilitate settlement of the matter;
(i) decide on issues that do not require evidence,
(ii) set a trial date where a trial date is necessary;
(iii)discuss the evidence that shall be required and the procedure
that shall be followed where a trial is necessary;
(iv)make recommendations to an Adjudicator to order a party to
produce any information at the settlement conference or
anything as evidence at the trial, and
(v) where damage to property is involved in the dispute, make
recommendation to an Adjudicator to order a party to permit a
person chosen by another party to examine the property
damage;
(b) file a report with the Court which may contain a question or issue
arising from the Court’s decision, or make a statement of the facts
from which the Court may draw inference it considers just; and
(c) may recommend to an Adjudicator that an order be made.
(13) On receipt of the report or recommendation referred to in rule 10(12),
the Adjudicator may—
(a) adopt a report or recommendation in whole or in part;
11
(b) vary or reverse a report or recommendation;
(c) require a supplemental report;
(d) remit the report or any part of it for further consideration to the
same or another person designated by the Registrar;
(e) decide a question or issue raised by the settlement conference or
the evidence taken at the settlement conference, with or without
additional evidence;
(f) order the entry of the judgment based on the report,
recommendation or otherwise as he or she considers just, in
accordance with rule 15; or
(g) enter judgment or make an order that is just, in accordance with
rule 15.
(14) Where a party does not disclose evidence as required by an
Adjudicator’s order, an Adjudicator at the adjourned settlement
conference or at the trial may—
(a) grant an adjournment and order that the defaulting party pay all the
reasonable expenses of the other party or parties incurred as a
result of the adjournment;
(b) order the matter to proceed without permitting the defaulting party
to produce the evidence at trial; or
(c) dismiss the claim, counterclaim, response or third party notice
where the conduct of the defaulting party amounts to a refusal to
comply with an Adjudicator’s order or to an abuse of the Court’s
process.
(15) Where judgment is entered at a settlement conference, rule 15 applies
as though the judgment was entered following a trial.
(16) An Adjudicator may dismiss a claim or enter a judgment or other
appropriate order against a party who does not attend a settlement
conference.
(17) Where a trial date is set at a settlement conference and a party is
absent, the Court shall serve a notice of the trial date on that party unless
the Adjudicator orders otherwise.
12
(18) Where either party does not comply with a settlement agreement
other than a payment schedule, either party may apply to the Court for an
appropriate remedy and the Court shall make an order that it deems just.
Amending or
withdrawing a
statement of claim
or response or other
document
11. (1) Anything in a statement of claim, response or other document that has
been filed by a party may be amended by that party—
(a) without permission, before the settlement conference commences;
and
(b) with the permission of an Adjudicator under rule 20(3), after the
commencement of a settlement conference.
(2) All amendments shall be underlined, initialled and dated on the
revised document and, where there is an order authorizing the
amendment, the document shall contain a reference to that order.
(3) A party who amends a filed document shall—
(a) file a copy of the revised document at the Court; and
(b) before taking any other step in the claim, serve in the manner set
out in rule 23, a copy of the amended document on each party to
the claim and the time period for response to a revised statement of
claim shall be as set out in rule 5.
(4) A party may withdraw a claim, counterclaim, response or third party
notice at any time.
(5) A party who withdraws a claim, counterclaim, response or third party
notice shall serve in the manner set out in rule 23, notice of the
withdrawal on all parties who were served with the claim, counterclaim,
response or third party notice and file a copy of the notice with the Court.
(6) A party who withdraws a claim, counterclaim, response or third party
notice may not proceed with it or file another notice with respect to the
claim, counterclaim, response or third party notice unless that party
applies for an order using prescribed form and is granted that order.
Witnesses 12. (1) To require a witness to attend Court, a party shall—
(a) complete a summon to a witness in prescribed form; and
(b) serve in the manner set out in rule 23, a copy of the summon to the
witness.
13
(2) At the time a summon is served, the party summoning the witness
shall offer the witness reasonable estimated travelling expenses and the
prescribed witness fee.
(3) Where a witness will attend Court voluntarily, a summon is not
necessary.
(4) A person who is served with a witness summon shall—
(a) attend Court at the time and place stated on the summon; and
(b) bring to Court any records and other things required by the
summon.
(5) A person who is served with a witness summon may apply to an
Adjudicator under rule 20(3) who may cancel the summon where—
(a) the person is not needed as a witness; or
(b) it would be a hardship for the person to attend Court as required by
the summon.
(6) An Adjudicator who cancels a witness summon may make another
order that the Adjudicator considers just, including an order changing the
date of the hearing.
(7) An Adjudicator may issue a warrant for the arrest of a witness who
does not attend Court as required by a witness summon where the
Adjudicator is satisfied that—
(a) the summon was served on the witness;
(b) reasonable travelling expenses and the required witness fee were
offered to the witness;
(c) no just cause is shown for the failure of the witness to attend; and
(d) justice requires the presence of the witness.
(8) Where a witness named in a warrant attends Court voluntarily, the
Adjudicator may cancel the warrant.
(9) Where a witness is brought to Court under a warrant for arrest or
attends voluntarily, and the witness’s evidence is still required, an
Adjudicator may—
14
(a) release the witness on conditions set by the Adjudicator;
(b) order the witness to be detained until his or her presence is no
longer required; or
(c) make any other order the Adjudicator considers just.
Hearing 13. (1) An Adjudicator may conduct a hearing without complying with the
formal rules of procedure and in doing so may—
(a) ask the parties to explain their cases, to respond to each other and
to call witnesses; and
(b) receive evidence in the way prescribed by the Act.
(2) Oral evidence shall be given under oath or affirmation.
(3) A party shall not call an expert to give evidence of their opinion
unless—
(a) that party serves, in the manner set out in rule 23, a summary of
the expert’s evidence on all other parties at least fourteen days
before the expert is called to give evidence; or
(b) an Adjudicator grants permission.
(4) Instead of calling an expert to give evidence, a party may introduce a
report stating opinions of an expert, where—
(a) the party serves in the manner set out in rule 23, a copy of the
report on all other parties at least fourteen days before the report is
introduced; or
(b) an Adjudicator grants permission.
(5) A statement of qualifications in an expert’s report is proof that the
expert has those qualifications unless there is evidence to the contrary.
(6) A party receiving another party’s expert report may serve on the other
party in the manner set out in rule 23, at least seven days before the trial
date, a notice requiring the expert to attend the trial for
cross-examination.
15
(7) Where an Adjudicator determines that calling another party’s expert
was unnecessary, the Adjudicator may order the party who required the
expert to attend to pay the expert’s expenses.
(8) Repair estimates and value of property estimates are not considered to
be expert evidence, but shall be served in the manner set out in rule 23, on
all other parties at least fourteen days before trial unless an Adjudicator
orders otherwise.
(9) Where a respondent or third party does not attend the trial, the
Adjudicator may—
(a) allow the claim; and
(b) enter judgment or make another appropriate order against that
respondent or third party.
(10) Where a claimant does not attend the trial, the Adjudicator may
dismiss the claim.
(11) The Adjudicator shall give a decision—
(a) in Court orally at the end of the hearing or on a later date; or
(b) in writing.
(12) Where an Adjudicator’s decision is to be given orally on a later date,
the Court shall notify the parties of the date.
(13) An Adjudicator’s written decision is effective on the date it is read
and signed in Court.
Offer to settle 14. (1) A party may offer to settle one or more claims by serving on the other
party in the manner prescribed in rule 23, an offer to settle in the
prescribed form.
(2) An offer to settle for an amount of money includes expenses under
rule 25 and expenses a party has been awarded from a prior hearing in the
same action.
(3) An offer to settle may be filed up to seven days before the date of
hearing or at a later time where permitted by an Adjudicator under rule
20(6).
(4) The party to whom the offer to settle is made, may accept the offer by
serving in the manner prescribed in rule 21, the acceptance of offer in the
16
prescribed form on the other party and by filing a copy with the Court
anytime before the trial date.
(5) Where an acceptance of offer is filed within the time limited, an
Adjudicator may enter a judgment in the terms of acceptance.
(6) This rule applies to claims, counterclaims and third party claims.
(7) Where several respondents are sued together, a claimant may not
make an offer to settle except jointly to all respondents and a respondent
may not make an offer to settle except jointly with all other respondents.
(8) Where there is more than one claimant, a separate offer to settle may
be made by or to a claimant.
(9) Where an offer to settle made by a third party is accepted by a
respondent, money shall be paid into Court by the third party and not paid
directly to that respondent, and that money shall not be taken out of Court
without an Adjudicator’s order or consent of all parties.
(10) Where the time limited by this rule, or by an Adjudicator’s order, for
offering and accepting a settlement has passed, an offer to settle may still
be made.
(11) Where a party to an accepted offer to settle fails to comply with the
terms of the offer, the other party may apply to an Adjudicator for a
judgment in the terms of the accepted offer under rule 20(3).
(12) A party whose claim has been satisfied may file a notification of
satisfaction with the Court.
(13) A party, against whom a claim is made, who satisfies the claim may
file a notification of satisfaction of the claim, together with proof that the
claim has been satisfied, with the Court.
Satisfaction piece 15. A satisfaction piece, in a form acceptable to the Court, indicating that a
judgment has been satisfied may be filed—
(a) by the creditor; or
(b) by the debtor upon proof of settlement of the debt.
Payment of the
judgment
16. (1) Judgment shall be entered against a party, in favour of another party
where—
17
(a) the Adjudicator decides at a trial that one party shall pay money to
the other party;
(b) one party admits all or part of a claim under rule 5 or 6, and the
person making the claim has applied for a judgment;
(c) a default judgment is entered under rule 8; or
(d) one party has made an offer to settle under rule 14 and the person
making the claim has applied under rule 14(12) for a judgment.
(3) A judgment may be enforced—
(a) by an order of the Court under these rules for payment, including
an order that a judgment be paid in full; or
(b) under the Civil Procedure Rules.
(4) Where judgment is entered without an instalment order, the
Adjudicator may, after judgment is entered, ask the debtor whether they
require time to pay, and where the debtor states that time is required to
fulfil the judgment, the debtor may propose a payment schedule.
(5) Where a debtor makes a proposal to pay under sub rule (4) of rule 16,
the Adjudicator shall ask the creditor whether or not the creditor agrees
with the debtor’s proposal.
(6) Where a creditor agrees with a debtor’s proposal, the Adjudicator may
order a payment schedule requiring the debt to be paid by a set date or by
instalments.
(7) Where a creditor does not agree with a debtor’s proposal, the
Adjudicator may order—
(a) a payment hearing; or
(b) a payment schedule.
(8) A debtor or creditor may apply to the Magistrates Court.
(9) The Adjudicator may without a hearing—
(a) enter judgment in an amount agreed between the parties plus costs
and expenses under rule 26 where—
18
(i) the respondent agrees to pay all or part of a claim on a
response, and
(ii) the claimant consents; and
(b) where no instalment order is in place—
(i) make an order establishing a payment schedule where the
respondent proposes or requests a payment schedule in the
response and the claimant consents to the order, and
(ii) make an order issuing a summons to a respondent to attend a
payment hearing where a proposed payment schedule is not
agreed to by the claimant.
(10) Where a debtor defaults on the payments under a payment schedule
or an order to pay the judgment in full, the enforcement provisions of the
Civil Procedure Rules apply.
(11) Where a judgment is entered in the absence of the parties because the
Adjudicator reserved the decision—
(a) the creditor may take any of the steps listed in rule 16(3); and
(b) the debtor may ask for a payment hearing under rule 17(9).
(12) Where an Adjudicator issues a warrant for the arrest of a debtor or an
officer, director or employee of a corporate debtor, the creditor may take
any steps for the collection of the judgment as if a payment hearing was
not outstanding.
Payment hearing 17. (1) The purpose of a payment hearing is to allow an Adjudicator to—
(a) assess the debtors ability to pay; and
(b) consider whether a payment schedule should be ordered.
(2) A payment hearing shall be held where it is—
(a) requested by the creditor under rule 16(3);
(b) requested by the debtor under rule 16(9); or
(c) ordered by the Adjudicator under rule 15(10).
19
(3) To ask for a payment hearing, a creditor shall complete the prescribed
form, and file it in Court.
(4) Where the debtor is a corporation, an authorized officer of the
corporation may be summoned to the payment hearing.
(5) Where the debtor is a partnership, a partner may be summoned to the
payment hearing.
(6) A person named in a summons to a payment hearing shall be served
by the person requesting the hearing in the manner set out in rule 23 at
least five days before the date of the payment hearing and proof of service
shall be filed with the Court by the person requesting the hearing at least
two days before the date of the payment hearing.
(7) A person who is served with a summons to a payment hearing may
apply to an Adjudicator under rule 20(6), and the Adjudicator may where
necessary—
(a) cancel the summons where the person is not the right person to
provide information on behalf of the debtor; and
(b) issue a new summons to another person to provide the information
on behalf of the debtor.
(8) A debtor or a person summoned may be required, either by a
summons issued under rule 16(3) or by an Adjudicator when ordering a
payment hearing, to bring to the payment hearing records and other things
which relate to the subjects listed in rule 16(11).
(9) To ask for a payment hearing, a debtor shall complete a notice of
payment hearing in the prescribed form following the instructions on the
form, and file it in Court.
(10) The debtor shall serve in the manner set out in rule 23 the notice on
the creditor at least five days before the date of the payment hearing.
(11) At any payment hearing under these rules, evidence may be heard on
any of the following—
(a) the income and assets of the debtor;
(b) the debts owed to and by the debtor;
(c) assets that the debtor has disposed of since the claim arose; and
20
(d) the means that the debtor has, or may have in the future, of paying
the amount owed.
(12) After hearing the evidence and submissions by the parties, the
Adjudicator may order a payment schedule specifying
(a) the date by which the debt shall be paid; or
(b) the amounts and dates of the instalments.
(13) Where a creditor does not attend a payment hearing, the Adjudicator
may hold the hearing, cancel or postpone it.
(14) Where a creditor applies, an Adjudicator may issue a warrant for the
arrest of a person who does not attend a payment hearing and who was—
(a) served with a summons to attend; or
(b) ordered in person by an Adjudicator to attend,
and just cause is not shown for the failure or refusal to attend.
(15) The creditor may apply to the Court to have a payment hearing at a
Court in another location from where the file is located where that Court
is nearest to where the debtor lives or carries on business or is temporarily
employed.
Warrant of arrest for
not attending Court
18. (1) A police officer who arrests a person under a warrant of arrest issued
under rule 12 (7) or rule 16(14) of shall promptly bring the person to
Court.
(2) Where a person named in a warrant attends Court voluntarily, the
warrant is cancelled.
(3) A warrant of arrest remains in force for three years from the date an
Adjudicator issues the warrant, but at the end of that period it expires and
a person shall not be arrested under it unless the warrant is renewed.
Where a warrant of
imprisonment is
issued
19. (1) Where a warrant of imprisonment is issued under rule 25(1), a police
officer may arrest the person named in the warrant.
(2) A warrant of imprisonment remains in force for two years from the
date of its issue, but at the end of that period it expires and a person shall
not be imprisoned under it.
21
Applications to the
Court
20. (1) The Court may make a consent order where one of the parties—
(a) files an application that contains the particulars of the order
requested; and
(b) satisfies the Court that all parties are consenting.
(2) Without a hearing, the Court may make—
(a) a consent order under rule 19(1);
(b) an order renewing a statement of claim or a third party notice under
rules 4(2) and 7(6);
(c) an order changing the date of the settlement conference under rule
10(8);
(d) an order permitting service of a statement of claim outside local
limits of the jurisdiction of the Court under rule 4(3);
(e) an order permitting alternative method of service under rule 4(6);
(f) an order transferring the matter to another Court under rule 5(6);
(g) an order for appointment of a intermediary under rule 20(16);
(h) an order changing the date of the hearing under rule 6(8) or 12(6);
(i) an order permitting a third party claim to be made under rule 7(1);
(j) a default judgment where a response to a counterclaim or third
party notice is not filed under rule 8(2);
(k) an order permitting a late response to be filed under rule 8(8);
(l) an order cancelling a witness summon under rule 12(5);
(m)an order permitting the changing of a document under rule 11(1);
(n) a review of a decision of a person designated by the registrar to
hear a settlement conference under rule 20(20); or
(o) any other order that the Court is authorized to make without notice
to another party.
22
(3) To apply for an order listed in rule 20(2), a party shall complete an
application in the prescribed form following the instructions on the form,
and file it at the Court.
(4) The Adjudicator may make the order or direct the applicant to appear
before the Court to support the application.
(5) After a hearing, an Adjudicator may make—
(a) an order changing or cancelling an order made in the absence of a
party under rule 21(1);
(b) an order cancelling a default judgment or dismissal order under
rule 21(2), and where the application is granted the Adjudicator
may order payment of reasonable expenses of the other party
related to the cancellation;
(c) an order changing or cancelling the terms of a payment schedule
under rule 21(3);
(d) an order extending or shortening a time limit under rule 21(11);
(e) an order for failing to obey a rule under rule 21(12); or
(f) any other order that an Adjudicator has the power to make and
notice of which is served in the manner set out in rule 23, on
another party.
(6) To apply for an order listed in rule 20(5), a party shall complete an
application in the prescribed form, and file it at the Court where the claim
was made unless the Court allows the application to be filed at another
Court under rule 20(7).
(7) A Court may allow an application under rule 20(6), to be filed at
another Court where—
(a) all the parties consent; or
(b) the Court is satisfied that the application is urgent.
(8) At least seven days before the date set for hearing an application
under rule 20, an applicant shall serve, in the manner set out in rule 21, a
copy of the application, and the affidavit where required under rule 20(2),
on each party that would be affected by the order requested, and service
of notice is not required where the application is for a default order where
a response to a third party notice has not been filed.
23
(9) Where the Court is satisfied that an application is urgent, it may allow
an application to be made under rule 20(6) even though the other parties
have not been served but a satisfactory attempt to give some form of
notice has been made.
(10) An application under rule 20(7) shall be heard at the Court where the
Court file is located, except where—
(a) all the parties agree to have the application heard in another Court;
or
(b) the Court is satisfied that the application is urgent.
Review or
cancellation of an
order
21. (1) An Adjudicator may review or cancel an order made in the absence of
a party other than a dismissal order or a default judgment where—
(a) a party applies under rule 20(6) within a reasonable time; and
(b) there is a good reason for changing or cancelling the order.
(2) An Adjudicator may review a dismissal order or default judgment if—
(a) the order or judgment was made without evidence having been
taken; and
(b) the party applies under rule 20(6) and attaches to the application
an affidavit containing—
(i) the reason the party did not file a response or attend the
settlement conference or trial;
(ii) the reason for a delay where there has been delay in filing the
application; and
(iii)the facts that support the claim or the defence.
(3) The terms of a payment schedule may be changed or cancelled where
an instalment order has not been issued, by applying to an Adjudicator
under rule 20(6) and the Adjudicator may make an order that that the
Adjudicator considers fair.
(4) In making an order under these rules, an Adjudicator may impose a
condition or give a direction that the Adjudicator considers fair.
24
(5) An Adjudicator may cancel, postpone or adjourn a settlement
conference, trial or hearing—
(a) to a specified date;
(b) to a date to be set by the Court; or
(c) without setting a date.
(6) An Adjudicator may direct that a trial or hearing that is set for one
place be held at another place.
(7) An Adjudicator may order that a settlement conference and trial set at
one place be heard at another place.
(8) An order takes effect on the day it was made unless otherwise ordered
by the Adjudicator who made the order.
(9) In calculating time under these rules or an order, the number of days
between two events is counted by excluding the days on which those
events happen.
(10) Where the last day of a period of time for filing or serving a
document or doing any other thing under these rules or an order, falls on a
Saturday, Sunday or a day when the Court is closed for a holiday, the
time ends on the next day that the Court is open.
(11) An Adjudicator may extend or shorten a time limit set by these rules
or by any order of the Court, on the terms that the Adjudicator considers
fair.
(12) A party who believes that another party has not complied with the
provisions of these rules may apply to an Adjudicator under rule 20(6) or
at a hearing, and the Adjudicator may make an order or give a direction
that the Adjudicator considers fair.
(13) An Adjudicator may, at the request of either party, correct any error
on the face of it or omission in an order and may add provisions on
expenses, or anything else that was not but should have been adjudicated
on.
(14) Where a claimant or respondent is a person who is under eighteen
years of age, a consent of intermediary form shall be obtained from the
Court, completed and filed in Court before a matter relating to that person
can proceed.
25
(15) Where there is no consent filed to allow a person under eighteen
years of age to defend an action the claimant may apply to the Court in
prescribed form requesting that the Court appoint the parent or guardian
or some other person to act as intermediary for the respondent.
(16) Unless otherwise stated, where a document is required to be signed
by the Court it may be signed by an officer of the Court, who is
authorized to do so.
(17) Where a party is dissatisfied with the decision of a person designated
by the Registrar to hear a matter under rule 10(12) the party may apply
under rule 20(6) to an Adjudicator for a review of the decision.
(18) After hearing those parties who attend, the Adjudicator may confirm
or vary the decision of the person designated to hear the matter under rule
10(12).
Electronic filing 22. (1) An electronic document shall be filed with the appropriate Court as
set out in rule 3(2).
(2) A person shall complete a remote access client application to become
a registered user for remote access to the Court and that application must
be approved by the Court prior to a person filing an electronic document
with the Court.
(3) A remote access client application, when accepted by the Court, shall
constitute an agreement between the registered user and the Court for
remote access to the Court.
(4) A registered user may electronically transmit a document to the
appropriate Court for filing when the document is accompanied by
payment of the applicable filing fees or when prior arrangements are
made with the Court for payment of the applicable fees.
(5) A document that has been transmitted for filing electronically under
this rule may be treated by the Court for all purposes as an original
document.
(6) Only the following documents may be completed and filed
electronically under this rule—
(a) Statement of claim;
(b) Response;
26
(c) Certificate of Service;
(d) Application for Default Judgment;
(e) Judgment;
(f) Application to an Adjudicator;
(g) Notice of Withdrawal;
(h) Affidavit under rule 24;
(i) Electronic Filing Statement;
(j) Judgment Registration Form and
(k) Satisfaction Piece, in a form acceptable to the Court, under rule
15.
(7) When completing forms to be filed electronically, required
attachments to the forms shall be uploaded as attachments and converted
to Portable Document Format (PDF).
(8) An affidavit may be submitted for filing electronically where—
(a) it clearly identifies the person signing, and
(b) it is accompanied by an Electronic Filing Statement in a form
acceptable to the Court completed by the advocate acting for the
person on whose behalf that document is being filed or, where that
person is unrepresented, by that person.
(9) A person who submits an affidavit for filing under rule 23(7) shall—
(a) keep the original paper version of the document until the earliest
of—
(i) the date on which the proceeding, including appeals, is finally
disposed of;
(ii) the date on which the appeal period for that proceeding has
expired and no appeals of the proceeding have been brought
within that period; and
27
(iii)the date on which the Court clerk requests that the original
paper version be filed, and
(b) where a request is made under paragraph (a)(iii), file the original
paper version immediately after that request is made.
(10) Where an electronic document is accepted for filing by the clerk, the
document is considered to have been filed—
(a) where the document is received by the Court at or before 4 p.m.
on a day on which the Court is open for business, on the day of
its receipt, or
(b) where the document is not received by the Court before 4 p.m.,
on the next day on which the Court is open for business.
(11) Despite rule 23(9), a document is considered to have been originally
signed where it has been authenticated in the manner contemplated by the
remote access client application.
(12) Where a document in paper form is filed with the Court, the clerk
may convert the document into electronic form by—
(a) storing the conversion in a computer or in another electronic
system that the clerk considers appropriate; and
(b) retaining the paper form of the document.
(13) Where the original documents were filed electronically in
accordance with this rule, there is no requirement to initial changes made
under rule 11.
(14) Where a document has been filed in accordance with this rule, a
person entitled to view and obtain a copy of the document may, on
payment of the proper fee—
(a) obtain from the Court a paper copy of the document;
(b) where the Court has provided a public access computer terminal,
view the document on that terminal; or
(c) where the person is a registered user, access the document in
accordance with the terms of the remote access client application.
(15) A document that is required to be served on a person may, where it is
an electronic document, be served electronically on that person—
28
(a) where the person has provided an email address for service, by
emailing it to that person's email address for service; and
(b) where the representative for that person has provided an email
address for service, by emailing it to that representative’s email
address for service.
(16) A document transmitted by email in accordance with rule 23(6) is
considered to have been served—
(a) where the document is transmitted before 4 p.m., on the day of
the transmission; or
(b) where the document is transmitted after 4 p.m. or on a Saturday,
Sunday or a public holiday, on the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday or a public holiday.
(17) The Court may use email to provide notification on a matter to
registered users.
(18) Notwithstanding that a document has been delivered in accordance
with rule 24(6), a person may—
(a) apply to set aside a default judgment;
(b) apply for extension of time; or
(c) in support of a request for an adjournment, provide evidence that
the document—
(i) did not come to the person’s notice;
(ii) did come to the person’s notice later than when it was
delivered or effectively delivered; or
(iii)was incomplete or illegible.
Service of
documents
23. (1) Where a person to be served is a natural person, the document shall be
served by—
(a) leaving a copy of it with the respondent; or
(b) mailing a copy to the respondent at the respondent’s last known
address and obtaining a signed document acknowledging receipt.
(2) Where the respondent is a corporation, the claimant may—
29
(a) mail a copy of it to the registered office of the corporation and
obtaining a signed document acknowledging receipt; or
(b) leave a copy of it—
(i) at the registered office of the corporation;
(ii) the place of business of the corporation, with a receptionist or
a person who appears to manage or control the corporation’s
business; or
(iii) with a director, officer, liquidator, trustee in bankruptcy or
receiver manager of the corporation.
(3) Where a respondent is a partnership, a document shall be served by—
(a) mailing a copy to a partner and obtaining a signed document
acknowledging receipt; or
(b) by leaving a copy—
(i) with a partner;
(ii) at a place of business of the partnership, with a person who
appears to manage or control the partnership business there;
or
(iii) with a receptionist who works at a place of business of the
partnership.
(4) Where a respondent is a county government or its organ or agency,
the document shall be served by—
(a) mailing a copy of it to the office of the County Attorney and
obtaining a signed document acknowledging receipt; or
(b) giving a copy to—
(i) the ward administrator;
(ii) sub-county administrator; or
(iii)someone acting in a similar capacity.
30
(5) A party shall promptly notify, in writing, the Court and all other
parties to a claim of a change in that party’s address.
(6) A party shall, in the statement of claim or response, give the party’s
address for service which shall be—
(a) the party’s residence, place of business or the party’s advocate’s
or representative’s office, where the party is not incorporated and
not a partnership; or
(b) its registered office, place of business or the party’s advocate’s or
representative’s office, where the party is incorporated or is a
partnership.
(7) Where the respondent is the national government, documents shall be
served on the Attorney-General.
Proof of service 24. Service of a document may be proved by filing at the Court any or all of
the following—
(a) for personal service, a certificate of service in the prescribed
form with a copy of the document attached;
(b) for service by mail, a certificate of service in the prescribed form
accompanied by—
(i) a signed document acknowledging receipt, and
(ii) a copy of the document that was served; or
(c) for personal service on an advocate or representative, a copy of
the document signed by the advocate.
Contempt of court 25. (1) Where a person—
(a) refuses to be sworn, affirm or answer a question;
(b) refuses to produce a record or other evidence;
(c) does not obey a direction or an order of the Adjudicator; or
(d) fails to attend Court when summoned or ordered to do so and does
not provide adequate reasons for failing to attend,
the Adjudicator may issue a warrant requiring the person to be
imprisoned for a specified period of not more than three days.
31
(2) Where a person who does anything referred to in rule 26(1) is—
(a) the claimant or applicant;
(b) an authorized representative of the claimant or applicant;
(c) a partner or a manager of a partnership that is the claimant or
applicant; or
(d) an agent of the claimant or applicant,
the Adjudicator may also dismiss the claim or application.
(3) Where a person who commits an act referred to in rule 26(1) is—
(a) the respondent or a third party;
(b) an authorized representative of the respondent or a third party;
(c) a partner or a manager of a partnership that is the respondent or
third party; or
(d) an agent of the respondent or third party,
the Adjudicator may also continue with the proceeding as if no
response had been filed.
(4) Before the expiration of a sentence imposed under rule 26(1), a person
imprisoned may request to be brought before the sentencing Adjudicator to
comply with the provisions of the rules, and where the Adjudicator is
unavailable a person may apply to the Court to be released upon conditions
until the person can appear before the sentencing Adjudicator.
Costs, fees and
expenses
26. (1) The fees for issuing documents and costs for service shall be paid by
the party preparing and serving them, but the Court may allow a party to
later recover those amounts.
(2) The Court may permit a party to recover costs where the party
provides receipts for costs claimed, and those costs may include the costs
of serving documents as set out in the Schedule, but a party cannot
recover more than 10 per cent of the amount of the claim as costs, unless
an Adjudicator orders otherwise.
(3) The costs and fees a party can recover are limited to the amounts that
are set out in the Schedule unless an Adjudicator orders otherwise.
32
(4) An Adjudicator may order a party or witness whose conduct causes
another party or witness to incur expenses to pay all or part of these
expenses.
Forms 27. The forms referred to throughout these rules may be obtained from the
Court, or from the Court’s website.
Dated........…………………......….2017
DAVID K. MARAGA
Chief Justice and President of the Supreme Court
33